
<div><h1><span class='it'>CHAPTER I</span></h1></div>

<p>‘Be quiet children,’ said Mrs Marble. ‘Can’t you see that
father’s busy?’</p>

<p>So he was. He propped his aching forehead on his hand,
and tugged at his reddish moustache in an unhappy
attempt at concentration. It was difficult to keep thinking
about these wretched figures all the time, and it would
have been even if Winnie did not try to poke John with
a ruler in the intervals of squirming and muttering over
her geometry homework. Mr Marble worried at his moustache
while he peered at the column of figures on the
scrap of paper before him. They seemed to be dancing in
a faint mist under his eyes. He had been nerving himself
for this effort for weeks now, and the instant that he
began it he wanted to leave off. He was sure that looking
at these figures would do no good. Nothing could do any
good now.</p>

<p>The column of figures was headed briefly, ‘Debts’. Rent
was three weeks overdue, and that was the smallest item
entered. He owed over four pounds each to the butcher
and the baker, and the milk bill came to over five. How
on earth had Annie managed to run up a five-pound milk
bill? He owed Evans, the grocer, more than six pounds.
Mr Marble felt that he hated Evans, and had hated him
ever since the time, a dozen years ago now, when they had
arrived in Malcolm Road as a young couple, and Evans,
apron, basket and whiskers complete, had called to solicit
for their custom. Annie had just told him that Evans had
threatened to put the brokers in if he were not paid. The
Bank would sack him for certain if anything like that
happened. To Mr Marble’s strained eyes the shape of Mr
Evans suddenly seemed to loom over the paper he was
regarding, with a flash of teeth and a leer in his eye like
the devil he was. Mr Marble bit deep into the end of his
pencil in a sudden flood of hatred.</p>

<p>There were some other items in the column too. The
names of some of the men at the Bank appeared on the
sheet of paper, and against them were set the amounts
that Mr Marble owed them. Some of these men had even
smaller incomes than his, and yet they managed nevertheless
to keep out of debt—and even were sometimes
able to lend money to poor devils like himself. But of
course they weren’t married, or if they were they did not
have extravagant wives like Annie. Not that Annie was
extravagant, though. Not really. She was just careless.
Rather like himself, thought Mr Marble, with weary self-reproach,
bending again to the figures. His debts
amounted to no less than thirty pounds! On the asset
side he had put nothing. He knew the amount of his
assets too well to bother to do that. He was acutely aware
of it. The balance in his account at the Bank was down
to five shillings, and he had two florins in his pocket.
There was no possibility of overdrawing. That would
mean dismissal just the same.</p>

<p>It was his fault, he supposed weakly. He had seen this
coming as long ago as last summer, and he had decided
then that if they did without a holiday and spent nothing
at Christmas they could get straight again. But they had
had their holiday, and they had spent more than they
should have done at Christmas. No, that had been Annie’s
fault. She had said that people would think it funny if
they did not go to Worthing as she had told them they
were going to do. And she had said it so often that in the
end they had gone. And of course she had really been the
cause of all those figures that were set against the names
of men in the Bank on Mr Marble’s little list. A man had
to have a drink occasionally, when he slipped out of the
office at half-past eleven, and of course he had to stand his
friends one too, if they were with him. He could have paid
for them easily if Annie had not spent all his money for
him. And he had to smoke too, and have a good lunch
occasionally. Mr Marble resolutely refused to think of
how much he had spent on his hobby of photography.
He knew that it was more than he should have done, and
somewhere inside his conscience there was a nasty feeling
that there was another bill, unreckoned in his list, due to
the chemist at the end of the road for things he had
bought for this purpose. The shelves in the bathroom
upstairs were full of materials, and Mr Marble did not
like to think of this, for he had never used half of them,
having lately found more amusement in contemplating
his hobby and buying things for it than in actually doing
anything.</p>

<p>It was all very annoying and exasperating. How his
head ached, and how tired he felt! His mind was numb.
The grim feeling of blank despair was swamped by complete
lassitude of soul. He realized vaguely that his oft-repeated
threat of sending the children to bed without
any supper would soon be carried into effect despite
himself. He would be sacked from the Bank, and he
would never get another job. He knew that well enough.
He supposed it would end like the cases one read about
in the paper, with his children’s throats cut and himself
and his wife dead of gas-poisoning. But at present he
hardly cared. He wanted to relax. When those blessed kids
had been packed off to bed he would drag the armchair
up to the fire and put his feet up on the coalbox and
read the paper and be comfortable for a bit. In the
decanter in the sideboard there was a little drop of whisky
left. Not much of course; three drinks perhaps, or maybe
four. Mr Marble hoped it was four. With a drink and a
paper and the fire he could forget his troubles for a little,
for he couldn’t do anything towards remedying them this
evening. Mr Marble hardly realized that he had said the
same thing to himself every evening for months now. The
prospect seemed ineffably alluring. He yearned towards
the decanter in the sideboard. And the wind was shrieking
outside, sending the rain spattering against the windows.
That would make it seem even more comfortable when
he was beside the fire.</p>

<p>But the children must be disposed of first. For some
obscure reason Mr Marble had an objection to drinking
whisky in front of his children. His wife did not matter
so much, although he would have preferred to have her
out of the way too. A glance at the clock disappointed him
a little. It was only half-past seven, and the children
would not be going to bed for another half-hour at the
earliest. He felt suddenly irritable. He peered surreptitiously
from under his eyebrows to see if he could catch
them misbehaving so as to send them off at once. The
whisky would taste all the better if he could come to it
fresh from a parental triumph and an autocratic exertion
of authority.</p>

<p>‘Stop that noise. John,’ he ordered, with queer, feeble
savageness.</p>

<p>John looked round from his chair by the fire a little
startled. Five seconds ago he had been mazed in the pages
of <span class='it'>How England saved Europe</span>, and had been leading the
Fusilier Brigade over heaps of dead up the blood-stained
hill of Albuera. He gazed vacantly at his father.</p>

<p>‘Don’t look at me like a fool,’ spluttered Mr Marble.
‘Do what you’re told and stop that noise.’ The two orders
were synonymous, but John did not realize that.</p>

<p>‘What did you tell me?’ he asked vaguely.</p>

<p>‘No impertinence, now. I said stop that noise.’</p>

<p>‘What noise, father?’ asked John, more to gain time to
collect his thoughts than for any other reason. But the
question was fatal.</p>

<p>‘Don’t try to deny it,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>‘Now, you were making a noise, you know, Johnny,’
said Mrs Marble.</p>

<p>‘You were kicking with your feet,’ chimed in Winnie.</p>

<p>‘I didn’t deny it,’ protested John.</p>

<p>‘You did,’ said Mrs Marble.</p>

<p>‘You did,’ said Winnie.</p>

<p>‘Be quiet, Winnie,’ snapped Mr Marble, rounding on
his usual favourite in unusual fashion. ‘You’re as bad as
he is, and you know it. Have you done your homework
yet? I send you to a good school, and this is all the return
I get for it.’</p>

<p>‘Why, I got a scholarship,’ replied Winnie, with a jerk
of her head.</p>

<p>‘Are you being impertinent too?’ demanded Mr
Marble. ‘I don’t know what you children are coming to.
It’s time for bed when you start being rude to your
parents.’</p>

<p>The fatal words were said, and the children looked at
each other in dismay. Mrs Marble made a typical faint-hearted
effort on their behalf.</p>

<p>‘Oh, not just yet, father,’ she said.</p>

<p>That was all the opposition that Mr Marble needed to
make him quite decided on the matter.</p>

<p>‘At once,’ he said. ‘John, go to bed—and leave that
book down here too. Winnie, pack your things neatly
ready for the morning and go along too. Let this be a
lesson to you.’</p>

<p>‘But I haven’t done my homework,’ wailed Winnie,
‘and there’ll be such a row if I haven’t done it to-morrow.’</p>

<p>John did not answer. He was wondering how the
Fusiliers would get on without him for the rest of their
advance. Even Mrs Marble was moved to further protest
at this drastic action, but her half-hearted entreaties were
ignored by both sides.</p>

<p>‘Be quick, I am waiting,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>It was inevitable. Sullenly Winnie began to stack her
books together. John stood up and put <span class='it'>How England
saved Europe</span> on the table. It was then, at the eleventh
hour, that diversion came. It came in the form of a loud
knocking at the street door. For a second everyone looked
at each other startled, for visitors were a rarity in Malcolm
Road, especially at the extraordinary hour of half-past
seven. Winnie recovered first.</p>

<p>‘I’ll go,’ she said, and slipped through into the hall.</p>

<p>The others heard her tugging at the latch, and then the
gas suddenly flickered as a gust of wind came rushing in
with the opening of the street door. A strange, loud, masculine
voice made itself heard asking for Mr Marble. He
was about to go out too when Winnie reappeared.</p>

<p>‘Somebody for you, father,’ she said, and even as she
spoke the owner of the strange voice came in behind her.</p>

<p>He was tall, and young, and seemed to be a study in
browns, for he wore a brown trench coat and muffler, a
brown tweed suit underneath, with brown shoes and
socks. His face, too, was brown, although the shrieking
wind outside had whipped it to a warm flush. He was
young and debonair and handsome, and the sparkle of
the raindrops on his muffler and the flash of his dark
eyes and the gust of cold wind that entered the room at
the same time as himself all combined to make his unexpected
appearance as dramatic as even John, standing
amazed by the fire, could wish for.</p>

<p>The stranger paused for a moment at the doorway.</p>

<p>‘Good evening,’ he said, a little diffidently.</p>

<p>‘Good evening,’ replied Mr Marble, wondering who
on earth he was.</p>

<p>‘I suppose you are my Uncle William,’ said the new
arrival. ‘I didn’t expect you to know me.’</p>

<p>‘I’m afraid I don’t.’</p>

<p>‘My mother was Mrs Medland, Mrs Winnie Medland,
your sister, sir, I think. I have just come from Melbourne.’</p>

<p>‘Oh, of course. You’re Winnie’s boy? Come on in—no,
let’s get your coat off first. Annie, poke up the fire.
Winnie, clear that stuff off that chair.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble bustled out into the hall with his guest.
His family heard him helping him off with his coat, and
then—</p>

<p>‘And how is your mother now?’</p>

<p>There was no immediate answer to this question. The
trench coat and the hat had been hung up on the hall-stand
and the pair were about to reappear in the dining-room
before the listeners there heard the hesitant, almost
whispered, reply.</p>

<p>‘She’s dead. She died—six months ago.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble was still muttering the conventional condolences
as they re-entered the dining-room, but he
changed to clumsy brightness at the earliest possible
moment. Truth to tell, he was not particularly interested
in his sister Winnie, of whom he probably had not
thought for the thirteen and a half years that had elapsed
since he had had his daughter christened after her. Also
he was feeling a little annoyed with this young man for
turning up and interfering with the comfort of his evening.
But Mr Marble was not the man to show it. Hostility
of any kind—even the instinctive hostility towards
strangers—was a feeling to be carefully concealed on every
occasion. That was the lesson learned as a result of a
lifetime spent in carrying out the orders of other people.</p>

<p>‘Annie,’ said Mr Marble, ‘this is our young nephew,
Jim. Do you remember him when he was a little boy, just
going out to Australia with Winnie and Tom? I think
I can. You wore a sailor suit, didn’t you, er—Jim. Here,
Winnie, this is a new cousin for you, one you never knew
you had. Now sit down, sit down, man, and let’s hear all
your news.’</p>

<p>‘Take that chair, Mr—Jim, I mean,’ said Mrs Marble,
stumbling in embarrassed fashion at having to address
an opulently clothed and handsome stranger by his
Christian name, ‘you must be frozen.’</p>

<p>The new arrival was nearly as shy as was his hostess,
but he suffered himself to be thrust into the best chair
in the house—the one Mr Marble had coveted all the
evening—while Mrs Marble ransacked her brain for
something to talk about, and while the children drew as
close as they could while remaining in the background.</p>

<p>Mr Marble plunged heavily into conversation.</p>

<p>‘When did you arrive?’ he asked.</p>

<p>‘This morning only. I came on the <span class='it'>Malina</span>, arriving at
Tilbury at twelve. In fact, I only reached London and
found a hotel and had something to eat before coming
here.’</p>

<p>‘But how did you know we lived here?’</p>

<p>‘Mother told me your address before she d-died.’ The
stumble was excusable. After all, the boy was no more
than twenty. ‘We’d often talked about this trip. She was
coming with me, you see. She never liked Australia—I
don’t know why—and after father died—’</p>

<p>‘Tom dead as well? That’s bad luck.’</p>

<p>‘Yes. He died the beginning of last year. It was that
really that made mother—’</p>

<p>‘Quite, quite,’ Mrs Marble clucked in sympathetic
chorus. She hated to hear of anyone dying.</p>

<p>Mr Marble made haste to change the conversation to
matters more interesting.</p>

<p>‘And how was your father’s business getting on?’ he
demanded.</p>

<p>‘Oh, pretty well. He made a lot of money during the
war. He didn’t want to, you know, but it just came, he
said. But mother sold out after he died. She said she
couldn’t run that big shipping office by herself, and I was
too young, and they offered a good price for it, so she
took it.’</p>

<p>‘So you’re a young man of leisure now, eh?’</p>

<p>‘I suppose so. I’ve only just come out of college, you
know. Melbourne University. I’m having a look round
to start with. That’s what mother always planned for me.’</p>

<p>‘Quite right too,’ said Mr Marble, with the instinctive
deference towards the independently rich which was by
now an inevitable trait in his character.</p>

<p>For a moment the conversation flagged, and the boy,
still a little shy, had leisure to look about him. These
were the only relatives he had on earth, and he would like
to make the most of them, although, he confessed to
himself, he was not greatly attracted at first sight. The
room was frankly hideous. The flowered wallpaper was
covered with photographs and with the worst kind of
engravings. The spurious marble mantelpiece was littered
with horrible vases. Of the two armchairs one was covered
with plush, the other with a chintz that blended unhappily
with the wallpaper. The other chairs were plain
bentwood ones. On a table in the window were dusty
aspidistras in vast green china pots. In the armchair
opposite him sat his uncle, in a shabby blue suit flagrantly
spotted here and there. He was a small man, with sparse
reddish hair and a bristling moustache of the same colour.
His weak grey eyes bore a worried expression—more
worried even than the expression he had already noticed
in the eyes of the tired men who had sat opposite him
in the bus which had brought him here. He had a silver
watchchain across his rumpled waistcoat, and on his feet
were shapeless carpet slippers, above which showed
heather mixture socks sagging garterless round his ankles.
Beside him, uncomplaining and uncomfortable on one of
the bentwood chairs, sat his wife, frail, pale and shabby;
the most noticeable thing about her was her lop-sided
steel rimmed spectacles. The children were only visible to
him when he turned his head uncomfortably. They certainly
were more attractive. The little girl, Winnie,
bore in her sharp features undeniable promise of good
looks, as she sat with her hands in her lap beside the
table, and the boy—John, wasn’t he?—was quite a fair
specimen of the fourteen-year-old. Nevertheless, young
Medland did not feel at all at ease in his present situation.
Six weeks on board a first-class liner, the only male
passenger unmarried between the ages of fifteen and fifty
is not the best introduction to the life of a poverty-stricken
suburban home. Medland felt the sudden need to
think about something else.</p>

<p>‘May I smoke?’ he asked.</p>

<p>‘Why, yes, of course,’ said Mr Marble, rousing himself
suddenly to his hospitable duties.</p>

<p>Mr Marble plunged into his pocket in search of the
battered yellow packet of cigarettes that lay there. It held
three cigarettes he knew, and he had been treasuring them
to smoke himself later in the evening. He spent as long
as he could before producing them, and he was successful
in his tactics. Medland already had produced his case and
was offering it to him.</p>

<p>It was a leather case, the parting gift of one of the
middle-aged women on the boat. Women never realize
that a leather case spoils cigarettes. But this was far more
than a cigarette case. It was a substantial wallet, with
pockets for stamps and visiting cards, and at the back,
sagging open in consequence of the way in which Medland
held it, was a compartment for money. And this
was full. Marble noticed, as the case was tendered to him,
a thick fold of Treasury notes, twenty pounds at least,
may be thirty, decided Marble, gauging it with a bank
clerk’s eye. Beside it was another fold of bank-notes—five
pound notes, most probably. The sight positively
dazzled poor Mr Marble’s vision. And it brought, too, a
ray of hope into the grim cells of dumb despair in his
soul. It was more than flesh and blood could bear not
to remark on it.</p>

<p>‘That’s a nice case,’ said Mr Marble, tendering a lighted
match to his guest.</p>

<p>‘Yes.’ Medland drew on his cigarette to make sure it
was well lighted. ‘It was a present,’ he added modestly,
and he held it out so that his uncle could see it more
freely.</p>

<p>The bank-notes flashed once more before Marble’s
tortured eyes.</p>

<p>‘Well lined too,’ said Marble, striving to keep the envy
out of his tone.</p>

<p>‘Yes, I got them at Port Said—oh, you mean the notes?’
Medland did his best not to show surprise at his uncle’s
bad taste. To assist in this he went into even further
explanation. ‘I had to cash one of my letters of credit as
soon as I got to London. The voyage left me without
a bean, pretty nearly, and what I had was Australian
money, of course.’</p>

<p>It was an idle enough speech, but it sufficed to set Mr
Marble thinking rapidly and unsteadily. This boy had
arrived just in time to save him. He surely would not
deny his new-found uncle a loan? Those Treasury notes
would save him, let alone the bank-notes. And a loan
from a nephew was not the same thing at all as a debt
to that devil Evans, who would be putting the bailiffs in
directly. It was not even in the same class as a debt to
those men at the office, to repay whom only enough to
keep them from complaining to higher officials had
absorbed all his month’s salary. On the heels of these
thoughts came appalling realization of the peril of his
position. It was the third of the month only, and he had
ten shillings in the world with which to stave off his
creditors and to support his family until his next pay-day.
Before this he had shut his eyes to the position with all
the small resolution he possessed. But now that there
was a chance of escape the danger in which he stood was
forced home upon him, making him shudder involuntarily
a little and setting his heart thumping heavily in
his chest. Mechanically he glanced across at the sideboard
in which was the decanter. But he checked himself. He
was not going to have to waste one of his last three—or
was it four?—drinks on this boy. He thrust the thought
of the whisky fiercely on one side and turned to making
cautious advances towards the nephew.</p>

<p>‘Did you have much difficulty in finding your way
here?’ he asked—the inevitable question always addressed
to the newcomer to the suburbs.</p>

<p>‘Oh, no,’ replied Medland. ‘I had your address, of
course, mother dug it up from your old letters before she
died. So I knew it was Dulwich, and in Trafalgar Square
I saw dozens of buses all going to Dulwich, and I got on
one and came as far as the terminus. Then it was easy.
The first person I asked told me the way to Malcolm
Road.’</p>

<p>‘Just so. And where did you say you were staying?’</p>

<p>Medland had not said he was staying anywhere, but
he told him. It was a substantial Strand hotel. It was then
that Medland, apropos of this, made the remark that was
to alter everything.</p>

<p>‘It’s funny to think of,’ he said, striving to keep the
conversation going, ‘but besides you there isn’t a soul in
England who knows anything about me. I don’t think I
was in the hotel more than an hour, and I only left my
hand luggage there. The rest of my stuff is at Euston.
What with going to the Bank and so on I simply didn’t
have time to collect it, even if it had got there. I was
thinking to myself as I came here that if I got lost and
never found my way back no one would mind at all—except
you, of course.’</p>

<p>‘H’m!’ said Mr Marble, and another train of thought
came to him on the instant, and he shuddered again.</p>

<p>Medland’s shyness was turning to boyish talkativeness.
He looked round to the two children.</p>

<p>‘Well,’ he said, and smiled, ‘you two don’t seem to have
much to say for yourselves.’</p>

<p>Winnie and John still remained silent. They had been
keeping as quiet as mice so as not to draw attention to
themselves and raise again the postponed question of bed.
But beside this John was lost in admiration of this
weather-tanned man who had come all the way from
Australia, and who treated such an amazing trip through
pirate-haunted seas with so little concern that he had said
no word about it. And he spoke so casually about hotels
too. John had noticed last year at Worthing that his
father spoke of people who lived in hotels as opposed to
those who live in rooms, and even in boarding-houses,
with awe in his voice. And this man lived in a hotel and
thought nothing of it!</p>

<p>As for Winnie, she was thinking that he was the most
beautiful man she had ever seen. His warm brown face
and his brown tweeds with their intoxicating scent were
wonderful. Then when he looked straight at you and
smiled, as he had just done, he was handsomer than
anyone she could imagine, far handsomer than the fairy
prince in the pantomime at Christmas.</p>

<p>‘Speak up, children,’ said their father. To Medland’s
fastidious ear it sounded as if he might have added,
‘Tell the pretty gentleman his fortune.’</p>

<p>The children grinned shyly. Winnie could say nothing.
But John made an effort, unused as he was to conversation
owing to severe repression by his father during his queer
moods of late.</p>

<p>‘You have kangaroos in Australia, haven’t you?’ he
said, with a fourteen-year-old wriggle.</p>

<p>‘You’re right,’ said Medland. ‘I’ve hunted them too.’</p>

<p>‘Ooh,’ gasped John ecstatically. ‘On horseback?’</p>

<p>‘Yes, for miles and miles across the country, as fast
as your horse could gallop. I’ll tell you about it some
day.’</p>

<p>Both children writhed in delight.</p>

<p>‘And bushrangers?’ said John. ‘Did—did you ever see
Ned Kelly?’</p>

<p>To Medland’s credit he did not laugh.</p>

<p>‘No such luck,’ he said. ‘There weren’t many round
where I lived. But I know a topping book about them.’</p>

<p>‘<span class='it'>Robbery under Arms</span>,’ said both children at once.</p>

<p>‘Oh, you’ve read it?’</p>

<p>‘Read it? I should think they had.’ This was Mr
Marble’s contribution to the conversation. ‘They’re
terrors for reading, those two kids are. Never see ’em
without a book.’</p>

<p>‘That’s fine,’ said Medland.</p>

<p>But the conversation wilted beyond recovery at this
intrusion. And Marble, intent on getting Medland to
himself, flashed a look at the children and jerked his
head skywards. They understood, and climbed down
dolefully from their chairs.</p>

<p>‘Bedtime, children?’ said Mr Marble in a tone of surprise
that was unsuccessful in its purpose of deceiving
Medland, since he had caught the tail end of Marble’s
signal. ‘Good night, then. Why, aren’t you going to kiss
me?’</p>

<p>They had not been intending to do so. The custom
had died out months before, when Marble had begun
turning to the decanter in the sideboard for distraction
from his troubles, and with children a custom three
months unused might as well never have existed. Besides,
John was nearly too old for kissing now. Both John and
Winnie kissed their father awkwardly, and their mother
casually. Then John shook hands with his new cousin. It
was the first time he had ever shaken hands as man to
man, with eye meeting eye in man’s fashion, and he was
very proud of it. Winnie, too, tried to shake hands in
imitation of her brother, but there was something in
Medland’s smile and in the gentle traction he exerted
on her hand that made her lean forward and kiss the
boyish mouth tendered to her. It felt funny, different
from other kisses she had known. It was a very silent
pair that went up to bed.</p>

<p>Marble turned away with evident relief as they closed
the door.</p>

<p>‘Now we can be comfortable,’ he said. ‘Draw your chair
up closer to the fire, er—Jim. What a night,’ he added, as
the wind howled outside.</p>

<p>Medland nodded moodily. He was feeling awkward. He
was not at all at home with these strange people. He
didn’t like the way Marble behaved towards his children.
The kids were all right of course, and the mother was a
nonentity. But there was an atmosphere about the place
that he hated. He pulled himself together and tried to
shake off the brooding premonitory mood that was oppressing
him. It was absurd, of course. Old Marble was
only a very ordinary sort of chap. Seedy and down at
heel, but quite all right. He was smiling oilily at present,
but that didn’t mean anything necessarily. Hang it all,
if he didn’t like the place he could clear out in a few
minutes’ time and never come back to it. For the matter
of that Medland’s thoughts swerved suddenly to the
utterly absurd—he could change his hotel next morning
and then they could never find him again. The bare idea
was sufficient to bring his mind back to reality. There was
no reason why he should think about things like that
at all. The kids were fine, and he’d see a lot of them
while he was in England. He could take them to a lot of
the places he felt he had to go to, the Tower of London
and St Paul’s, for instance. That would be topping.</p>

<p>Mr Marble was speaking to his wife.</p>

<p>‘What about some supper, Annie?’ he was saying. ‘I
expect our young friend here is hungry.’</p>

<p>‘But—’ began Mrs Marble hopelessly, and then checked
herself hastily and clumsily as she caught sight of her
husband frowning at her.</p>

<p>‘Don’t worry about me, please,’ put in Medland. ‘I
dined just before I came out.’</p>

<p>‘That’s all right, then,’ replied Marble. ‘I dined just
after I came in.’</p>

<p>And he laughed. The laughter was just the least bit
strained.</p>

<p>Conversation began again, resuming its hopeless,
desultory way while Medland wondered in a bored, young
man’s fashion why on earth he did not get up and go at
once. There were really several reasons. One was that the
wind and the rain were continually making themselves
heard outside; another was that the fire was most attractive—it
was the most attractive thing in the whole house—but
deep down there was a feeling of relief that he was
not in a hotel with nothing special to do. Medland had
laid plans for a very exciting time on his arrival in England,
but at the moment he was feeling a little homesick
and not in the mood for excitement of any kind. It might
have been as well if he had felt otherwise.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble came into the picture at times. She asked
him homely questions as to whether he was sea-sick on
the voyage, and whether he had enough to eat, and
whether he was warmly enough clad to face an English
winter. Medland answered politely enough, but Marble
was positively rude to her on more than one occasion.
Medland found himself regarding the little man
curiously. His face was a little moist, and his eyes were
brighter than they had been before, as though he was
growing excited about something of which the others
knew nothing. He cut his wife short repeatedly, and his
questions grew more and more personal. Medland realized
that to a person of Marble’s character the idea of conversation
would consist of a series of questions, but even
that was no excuse for this searching cross-examination as
to his resources, his friends and his knowledge of affairs.</p>

<p>Poor Marble! And poor Medland! Marble was being
affected more and more by the realization of his position,
rendered more acute by envious contrast with Medland’s,
while Medland’s every answer seemed calculated to urge
Marble on to—something. Marble was not quite sure what
it was. It could not just be borrowing money; he had
decided to attempt that hours ago. The thumping heart
within him seemed to indicate something more unusual
than that. Marble was nerving himself to definite action—for
the first time in his life, be it added.</p>

<p>With the cunning of the weak, he did his best to disguise
the state he was in, while all the time, without conscious
volition on his part, his furtive mind was twisting
and turning, devising the course of action he was likely
to take. No wonder Medland looked at him oddly at
times.</p>

<p>Time seemed to be passing with extraordinary rapidity.
It seemed to Marble that every time he looked at the
clock on the mantelpiece another half-hour had fled.
Twice had he detected in Medland’s manner an intention
of leaving as soon as the conversation broke, and each
time he had flung himself into the breach, talking nonsense,
as he was painfully aware, in order to stave off the
crisis that would arise when that time came.</p>

<p>His fevered mind roused itself to additional activity.
He nerved himself to make the sacrifice which he realized
was inevitable, and gathered himself together in his chair
as casually as he could manage.</p>

<p>‘What about a drink?’ he asked. In such a matter-of-fact
way did he bring the question out that Medland did
not guess the wrench it cost him.</p>

<p>Medland hesitated before he replied; he was not yet a
man of the world enough to regard an offer of a drink
as an ordinary event; and during that little hesitation
Marble had risen and walked across to the sideboard, beyond
the table. For a moment he was lost to view as he
dived down below the level of the table; when he rose
again he had a siphon of soda-water—half full—under
his arm, two tumblers in one hand, and in the other, held
very carefully, a decanter of whisky, a quarter full. He
set these things out on the table near his chair; he was
standing very close to his wife as he did so. He took the
opportunity of mumbling something to her. He spoke
swiftly and obscurely, so obscurely that Medland, though
he noticed the act, could not hear the words, and took
them to be some hint as to domestic arrangements—probably
a comment on the shortage of whisky. What Marble
had really said was: ‘Want talk business. Go to bed. Say
headache.’</p>

<p>Annie Marble heard the words some time before she
attached any meaning to them. That was usual with her.
Even when she realized their significance, slight enough
to her, she did not act at once upon them. It was always
a long time before she could co-ordinate her faculties to
change from one course of action to another.</p>

<p>Marble poured out a drink with great deliberation. It
was not a very generous one, for he was confronted with
the problem of offering his guest as much as possible
while conserving for himself enough at least to keep up
appearances; yet his whole soul was crying out for that
whisky. His hand shook a little as he poured, so that the
decanter chattered faintly on the rim of the tumbler, but
he took a firm grasp of his nerves with a last despairing
effort and completed the business, without having consulted
his guest as to quantity even to the usual conventional
extent. Then he sat back in his chair, half in
anguish, half in satisfaction. He had managed the pouring
out perfectly, he told himself. He had given Medland
plenty while quite a respectable amount remained in the
decanter. Easily enough for two more drinks, anyway, and
the half-formed plot in Marble’s mind demanded that
there should be enough for two drinks left in the decanter.
But it was a frightful effort for him to sip casually
from the cool tumbler in his hand. He wanted that drink
so terribly badly, but all he could allow himself to do
was to nod perfunctorily across to Medland, sip just a
little, and then put the glass down indifferently beside
him. But even that small amount was enough to calm
his shrieking nerves, so that his shaking body became as
calm and detached as his scheming, uncontrolled mind.</p>

<p>As he replaced the glass Annie Marble rose. She knew
the role it was necessary for her to assume, and by some
strange freak of mental poise she did it perfectly. Her
dim mind had never fully realized the grim peril in which
lay the fortunes of her husband and herself; nothing that
Marble could say—and he said little—would force it
home to her as long as she could go on obtaining credit
at the shops; but she knew they were in some trouble, and
that Marble was intending that this young nephew of his
should help them out. It behoved her therefore to do her
best, quite apart from the fact that her negative personality
responded in small actions to every whim of her
husband, just as he wished.</p>

<p>‘I think I shall go to bed, Will,’ she said rising a little
wearily from the uncomfortable bentwood chair. ‘I’ve got
a bit of a headache.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble was greatly concerned.</p>

<p>‘Really, dear?’ he said, rising. ‘That’s bad luck. Have
a nightcap before you go up?’ And he nodded towards
the decanter.</p>

<p>But even as he nodded, with his face away from Medland,
there was a little scowl between his eyebrows that
gave Mrs Marble her cue.</p>

<p>‘No, dear, thank you,’ she said, ‘I’ll just go straight up
and it will be better in the morning.’</p>

<p>‘Just as you like,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble moved across to Medland.</p>

<p>‘Good night, er—Jim,’ she said, shaking hands.</p>

<p>‘Good night. I hope it will really be better to-morrow.’</p>

<p>‘Good night, dear,’ said Mr Marble, ‘I won’t disturb you
when I come up if I can help it. I expect I shall be a
bit late.’</p>

<p>He pecked her on her cold cheek—a typical marital
kiss. But Mr Marble was not in the habit of kissing his
wife good night at all, and he never worried in the least
about disturbing her when he came to bed. However, it
gave the scene that calm domestic atmosphere that Mr
Marble’s subconscious mind, which had him in full control,
had decided was necessary to the occasion.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble had gone, and they heard the dragging
steps on the floor of the room above.</p>

<p>‘No need for hurry, I suppose, seeing that you’re a gay
young bachelor,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>‘None at all,’ replied Medland, and regretted saying it
the instant it was said. He had really no desire to go on
being bored for a further interminable period. But his
answer had committed him to another half-hour at the
very least, and he endeavoured to reconcile himself to it.</p>

<p>Just for a brief space Mr Marble regained full control
over himself, and he made a brief and unavailing struggle
against the inevitable which a stronger power within him
was forcing upon him. He began to talk again on the
subject of Medland’s money—the subject on which his
lack of decent reticence had already annoyed his guest.</p>

<p>‘So you’re quite a well-off young man now, it seems?’
he said, with exasperating joviality.</p>

<p>‘I suppose so,’ was the curt reply.</p>

<p>‘A good bit to spare for investments, I suppose?’</p>

<p>It was a blundering way of putting it, and it failed.
Even on the voyage over more than one man had come
to Medland with get-rich-quick schemes, and he had contrived
to see through them. And so many people had
borrowed money from him that the process was both
familiar and annoying to him. Medland determined to
stop this attempt once and for all. It might be awkward
for a bit, but it would save endless trouble in the future.
He looked straight into Marble’s eyes.</p>

<p>‘No,’ he said, ‘I haven’t any to invest. I’m quite satisfied
with the arrangement that my father made before he
died. I’ve got just enough, and no more. And I put up
with it.’</p>

<p>That settled the matter definitely enough for anyone,
but, to Medland’s surprise, Marble showed no sign of
discomfiture. Medland did not know it, but at a bound
the lurking power within his uncle had regained possession
of him, and had at once begun to smooth the way
for the inevitable.</p>

<p>‘A good thing too,’ said Marble, and his manner of
saying it left Medland seriously in doubt as to whether his
former question had really been a feeler for a loan. ‘The
market’s in a rotten state at present. I shouldn’t like to
buy at all just now, not gilt-edged. Sit tight and hang on
to what you’ve got, that’s my motto all the time
nowadays.’</p>

<p>He said it in all sincerity, and Medland actually felt
himself warming towards him. At that time Medland was
in serious danger of falling into the delusion that so often
attacks men of wealth who have had their wealth from
boyhood and have been ‘stung’ too often by the unscrupulous—he
was in danger of imagining that everyone with
whom he came into contact was seeking profit at his
expense. The surest way to his heart was to convince him
of the contrary, and that Mr Marble, in those few instants,
had nearly succeeded in doing.</p>

<p>The conversation swung easily into discussion of the
investment market, and that without the personal note
that Medland so much resented. Somewhere within him
Marble possessed a clever turn for finance, which hitherto
he had been unable, as well as too lazy, to exert. Medland,
with a hard head for business inherited from his shipbroking
father, recognized a surprisingly kindred spirit.
For the first time that evening he really began to enjoy
himself. He drained his glass almost without thinking of
it—enthusiasm succeeded in overcoming his juvenile distaste
for whisky even though he had never been able to
make himself like it.</p>

<p>Marble was watching him with fierce intentness
through narrowed eyes. Medland hardly noticed it, and
attached no importance to it if he did. Then Marble
pulled himself out of his chair, glass in hand, and addressed
himself to the decanter. That foolish heart of his
was thumping again, thumping heavily, but it did not
affect his actions. They were quite under control—the
control of that inward force which had taken charge of
him and which recognized the inevitable.</p>

<p>Marble reached across and drew Medland’s glass from
his hand. ‘There’s only one more drink apiece,’ said
Marble. ‘I’m sorry, but we weren’t expecting visitors tonight,
you know.’</p>

<p>He said it in such a matter-of-fact way that Medland
had no chance even of trying to refuse the second drink.
Idly Medland watched Marble pour out the whisky from
the decanter with the painful care that had characterized
his action before. The liquid stood level in the two
tumblers. Marble was apparently about to splash in the
rest of the soda-water from the siphon when he paused
as though listening.</p>

<p>‘Just a minute,’ he said, ‘I think one of the kids is
calling out.’</p>

<p>Medland had heard nothing, but he was unused to the
noises of the house and made no question. Mr Marble had
heard nothing, either. He had said what he did as an
excuse to withdraw from the room and go upstairs. It was
the most natural action in the world for him to creep
out of the room to listen to hear if either of his children
was frightened, and it was most natural too, that he
should be carrying in his hand the tumbler that he had
held at the moment his attention was distracted. Medland
watched him go; everything was so natural that he did
not give a second thought to it.</p>

<p>Hardly more than a minute later Marble came tiptoeing
back down the stairs and into the room, the glass
still in his hand.</p>

<p>‘False alarm,’ he said. ‘One gets used to these things
when one is the father of a family.’</p>

<p>He turned again to the siphon, and it hissed into the
tumblers. Then he passed Medland’s across to him. As he
took it the wind outside howled again louder than ever;
the windows rattled and they heard the rain pelting
against the glass.</p>

<p>‘What a night,’ said Medland.</p>

<p>‘Drink up,’ replied Marble, very, very calmly.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER II</span></h1></div>

<p>When Annie Marble woke in the early morning she was
oppressed with a headache—a real headache, this time.
She had had a restless night, although, true to his word,
astonishingly enough, her husband had not disturbed her
when he came up. At this very moment he was sleeping
heavily at her side. She turned in the bed and looked at
him in the half light that was straying through the untidy
blinds. He lay on his back, his sparse hair standing on
end, his eyes closed and his mouth open, his bristling red
moustaches reinforced now by a coarse but scanty growth
of beard. His hands clutched the sheets, and his breath
passed in and out of his mouth with a stertorous sound.
To most people he would have been an unpleasing picture,
but Annie Marble did not think so. She was used
to it in any case, and his present helpless attitude and
appearance always roused the mother spirit within her
which was almost her sole ordinary characteristic now.
She would have liked to have taken him into her arms
and hugged him a little, but she would not do so for fear
of disturbing him.</p>

<p>Instead, she began to wonder whether he had been
successful in his management of his interview with the
strange nephew last night. She hoped so. She knew he had
been worried about money lately; he had told her so on
occasions. And he had cut down the money he was
accustomed to give her. That didn’t matter much, as Mr
Evans and the milkman and the others were all so obliging.
But he had been bothered about it, she knew. So
she hoped the nephew—she was sure she would never
learn to call such a splendid young man plain ‘Jim’—had
done something for them. He ought to have done,
for he had stayed long enough. She had heard them talking
long after she had settled herself to sleep. The remembrance
brought a new rush of dim recollections to her
mind. Will had come upstairs then, just when she was
nearly asleep. She remembered wondering what he came
for. He had gone into the bathroom; she had heard his
keys rattle as he unlocked, she supposed, his photographic
cupboard. It was probably to get something he wanted to
show Jim. There, she had got it quite natural that time.
Jim must be interested in photography too.</p>

<p>For a space her muddled thoughts followed no settled
line. Then she came back to last night. If Jim was interested
in photography he must have done something for
Will—to Annie’s mind everything was done for everybody
by somebody else. And she must have been dreaming
when she thought she heard that loud cry. She was awake
just afterwards, she knew; she must have been dreaming
that someone had called out loud, and had awakened
still dreaming it. Yes, that must have been it, and she must
have gone to sleep again and started dreaming again at
once, for she had a hazy, muddled recollection of hearing
a strange noise downstairs, as though something was being
dragged along the linoleum of the passage downstairs, and
one or two sharp taps as though some things were
dropping sharply from one step to another on the little
dark staircase just outside the kitchen door. What a silly
thing to dream!</p>

<p>So Jim must have done something for Will. That was
a good thing. She hoped Will would tell her all about
it when he had the chance, because generally he did not
tell her anything, and she was not much good at guessing.
It was a little bit of a pity that Will said so little, for he
could talk so nicely when he was in the mood. But, there,
you can’t have everything. And Will was <span class='it'>such</span> a dear all
the time. And just now he looked such a baby, such a
nice little baby. She did wish she could take him in her
arms just for a moment or two, the way she used to hold
John, and Winnie too, when they were little. They
weren’t such babies now, and tried to get on without their
mother, and she felt a little bit lonely sometimes. When
Will wasn’t worried by things she could still love him like
that, though. It was a pity that he was worried such a lot
nowadays. But now that Jim had done something for
him it would be all right perhaps. She would buy some
new nightdresses, like those in the windows in Rye Lane,
very warm and nice, but looking quite nice, too, with
nearly real lace on the edges of the sleeves. Then perhaps—but
here the alarum on the table at her side went off,
and she had to stop thinking.</p>

<p>The sudden noise brought her husband to a sitting-up
position in an instant. He was still grasping the sheets,
and his erect hair made him look so like a frightened baby
that Mrs Marble laughed. He glared and blinked at her
uncomprehendingly for a while.</p>

<p>‘W—what is it?’ he demanded.</p>

<p>To Mrs Marble, mentally constituted as she was, no
strange mood came amiss, or seemed strange to her.</p>

<p>‘It’s just the clock, dear,’ she said, ‘half-past seven.’</p>

<p>‘The clock?’ said Mr Marble. ‘I thought—I was dreaming.
Just the clock?’</p>

<p>He still muttered to himself as he snuggled down into
the bed again, with his face hidden by the pillows. Annie
had never known him mutter to himself before, but he
was still muttering and mumbling to himself as she began
to dress. Then suddenly he stopped muttering, and sat
upright again in the bed.</p>

<p>‘By God!’ he said. ‘I wasn’t dreaming.’</p>

<p>He threw off the bedclothes and climbed stiffly out of
the bed. He looked like a pathetic little boy in his striped
blue and white pyjamas as he hobbled across the room,
to where his clothes were piled untidily on a chair. He
tumbled some of these on the floor as he seized his coat,
and he plunged his hand into the breast-pocket. Annie
could not see what he found there, but apparently it
confirmed his suspicions. He stared vacantly across the
room for several seconds, the coat dangling from his
hands.</p>

<p>‘No,’ he repeated, ‘I wasn’t dreaming.’</p>

<p>He hobbled stiffly but feverishly back across the room
and thrust his feet into his carpet slippers, and then hurried
out of the room. Annie, amazed, heard him enter
Winnie’s bedroom next door. Then she heard him pull
up the blind there, while Winnie sleepily inquired what
was the matter, unanswered. Annie simply did not understand
it. It was the first time she could ever remember
his getting out of bed before breakfast was ready. But she
could not wait to reflect on the matter. She huddled on
the rest of her clothes and hastened downstairs to look
after breakfast.</p>

<p>There was no end to the surprises of that day. To begin
with, Mr Marble came down in his Sunday clothes of
neat blue serge, instead of the dilapidated suit which he
usually wore to business, and he only replied to Annie’s
innocent and inevitable remark on this strange phenomenon
with a scowl. He had not come straight down into the
dining-room, as was his wont, either. Instead, he had gone
into the tiny and seldom entered sitting-room at the back,
and Annie, hastening in duty bound to see what he
wanted, found him staring out of the window at the little
patch of muddy backyard beyond. It was the same view
as he must have seen when he went so surprisingly into
Winnie’s bedroom. He could see it at any time when he
was home, and he must have seen it several hundred, but
for all that he was peering through the window at the
muddy bed, flowerless as ever, with an intentness that
even Annie noticed. It was extraordinary. It was true that
by getting up as soon as she had done he was a quarter
of an hour ahead of his usual time, yet even that was no
reason for his wasting a good five minutes after his breakfast
out in the yard wandering aimlessly up and down
as though he was looking for something. Yet even Annie
could see that he was relieved not to find anything.</p>

<p>During breakfast there was nothing unusual. Mr
Marble ate little, but that was his way, and he said less,
but no one ever said anything at breakfast at 53 Malcolm
Road. John was deep in homework he had to prepare for
school, and Winnie sewed a button on her glove in the
interval of eating porridge. But after breakfast, while
Mrs Marble was in the passage with her husband helping
him on with his coat, he pulled from his pocket, loose, as
though he had laid them there ready, a small roll of
Treasury notes.</p>

<p>‘Here,’ he said, ‘take these, and for God’s sake go and
pay Evans off this morning. And we aren’t going to deal
with him any more. Get what you want from Richards’
in the future. There’s enough there for Evans’ bill and a
bit over.’</p>

<p>Annie took the notes thankfully.</p>

<p>‘Oh, I am so glad, dear,’ she said. ‘So Jim did do something
for you after all?’</p>

<p>‘Eh?’ said Mr Marble suddenly, and she shrank back
as she caught sight of the expression on his face. ‘What
do you mean?’ he said.</p>

<p>‘Nothing, dear, except that. Why—what——?’</p>

<p>But Mr Marble had snatched open the door and was
striding off. He was muttering again.</p>

<p>Truly, Annie had much to think about as she began
her daily household duties, and even she felt what a pity
it was that she could not think very clearly. There was
Will’s stiffness, now. He was so stiff that he could hardly
walk that morning, and she had never known that since
before they were married and he used to play football.
But Will couldn’t have been playing football last night,
could he now? It made her anxious. Then upstairs a new
surprise awaited her. Will’s other suit, his old everyday
one, lay in a tumbled heap on the bedroom floor. She
picked it up and put it away. It was sopping wet, and
it was thick with mud. That must be why he did not
wear it in the morning. How could he have got it so wet
and muddy? The idea of football came to her mind again,
but of course that was silly. Will did not play football
now, and if he did it wouldn’t be late at night and in
his ordinary clothes. With a sigh she left the problem
alone and went on tidying the room. Then there were
Winnie’s and John’s bedrooms to be done, and after that
a look round just to see that everything was in order. In
the bathroom an old memory recurred to her. Will had
come in here last night. Perhaps she could see what he
came for? But she could see nothing different from usual
as she looked round. The locked, glass-fronted cupboard
in which Will kept his chemicals hung on the wall beside
her. She peered in, as she had done hundreds of times
before. The manifold bottles meant nothing to her; but
she liked to look at the labels and wonder what they
were all about. Some of the bottles were of a mysterious
brown, and some were white. They were all very neatly
arranged. Except one, and that was a little out of its
place on the shelf. (As it might be if a man had put it
back there in the dark.) Annie glanced casually at the
label. It conveyed nothing to her at all, but it happened
that the queer name stuck in her mind—potassium cyanide.
She turned away from the cupboard without further
thought.</p>

<p>There was a pleasurable little excursion before her.
She felt quite thrilled with imagining it as she put on her
hat before her bedroom mirror. It was a long time since
she had had a lot of money in her pocket as she had
now. Not that it would stay there long, as she had to pay
off Evans’ bill, but it made her feel very rich and great
to go into Evans’ shop and ask, in quite a matter-of-fact
way, for her bill, and then to open her bag and produce
a roll of notes and hand over the amount as if she
were accustomed to such transactions every minute of her
life. That would be nice, and then she would go on to
Richards’, and walk in there, and Mr Richards would be
so nice to her because she was a new customer, and she
would order what she wanted, and he would say ‘Yes,
madam’, and ‘No, madam’, as if her every word was law.
She was glad that Jim had done something for Will.
Otherwise she would not be having such a happy day.
After all, by contrast with the ordinary day of a woman
with a house to look after, it would be a happy day.</p>

<p>She was still feeling happy when Mr Marble returned
from the office in the evening, just after the children had
had their tea and were settling down to their homework.
He looked very tired, poor soul, and he still walked stiffly,
but Mrs Marble had a nice tea ready for him thanks to
her visit to Mr Richards’ shop. There were nice scrambled
eggs, good eggs, not the other kind, and three pieces of
toast, and there was fresh tea in the pot. Mrs Marble was
disappointed when he looked at the pleasant tea-table
with evident distaste. He flung himself down in an armchair
with a sigh.</p>

<p>‘Anybody been?’ he demanded.</p>

<p>‘No, dear, no one,’ replied Annie, surprised.</p>

<p>‘Sure?’</p>

<p>‘Of course I am, dear. Who is there to come? There
was no one besides the milkman, and people selling
things. It wasn’t Mr Brown’s day for the insurance.’</p>

<p>‘That’s all right then,’ said Mr Marble, and he began
to unwrap the parcel he had brought in with him. The
children looked up with interest, but they were disappointed.
It was only a stupid old bottle of whisky. But
Mr Marble looked at it very eagerly.</p>

<p>‘Aren’t you going to have your tea, dear?’ asked Mrs
Marble.</p>

<p>Mr Marble looked, hesitated, and looked again.</p>

<p>‘Oh, all right, then,’ he said grudgingly.</p>

<p>He sat down before his tray and began to eat while his
wife began her delightful duty of looking after him,
pouring out his tea, refilling the teapot from the kettle
on the fire, and seeing that he was comfortable. But Mr
Marble had hardly begun when he rose from the table
and hurried out of the room. Annie, hurt and mystified,
heard him in the sitting-room next door—for the second
time that day, and yet perhaps the second time for
months. Almost mechanically she followed him, to find
him peering through the window in the half light out
into the backyard, where there was a small rain falling.
He started as he heard her behind him.</p>

<p>‘What are you following me about for like this?’ he
snapped.</p>

<p>‘Nothing dear. Is there anything you want, dear?’</p>

<p>‘Nothing, dear. Anything you want, dear?’ he gibed.
‘Only a wife with some sense. That’s all.’</p>

<p>He pushed past her without apology, back to the
dining-room. She found him there seated at the table, but
he had pushed his nice tray away, and was staring
gloomily at the whisky bottle, which was perched, like
some family god, in the exact centre of the table. He
could not take his eyes off it. He did not look up as she
came in, nor did he speak. For some minutes there was
quiet in the room, broken only by the scratching of
Winnie’s pen and the whispering of the two children
to themselves as they toiled over their homework. Annie
ought to have taken away the tray and started the washing
up. That was her next duty, but for some reason she did
not do it. Mr Marble’s gaze shifted from the whisky bottle,
and fixed itself on the tablecloth. Clearly he was following
some new train of thought. Suddenly he moved uneasily
in his chair, and then he looked up.</p>

<p>‘Has Mrs What’s-her-name been here to-day?’ he asked
his wife. ‘Oh, you know who I mean—the washerwoman
person.’</p>

<p>‘No, dear, of course not. She comes on every other
Monday. She won’t be coming until Monday week.’</p>

<p>‘Well, she’s not to come at all. You must do the washing
yourself if you can’t afford to send it out.’</p>

<p>‘Of course we can’t afford to send it out, dear. Laundries
are dreadfully expensive now.’</p>

<p>‘Then you must do it yourself.’</p>

<p>‘But I don’t want to. Why must I, Will? It’s dreadfully
hard work.’</p>

<p>‘Hard work never killed anyone yet. I’m not going to
have strange women in <span class='it'>my</span> house and hanging up clothes
in <span class='it'>my</span> garden any more. That’s why.’</p>

<p>‘But——’</p>

<p>‘That’s enough, now. Do what I say and don’t argue.’
And Mr Marble turned his gloomy gaze once more to the
whisky bottle.</p>

<p>Poor Annie was almost crying. It had been such a nice
day up to now, and now everything was going wrong. To
cover her whimpering sniffs she took up the tray and
went with it down the stairs into the kitchen.</p>

<p>Mr Marble eyed the whisky bottle. He felt he needed
some, despite the fact that he had already had three or
four—or was it five or six?—whiskies that day. He was
very tired, very, very tired, and his head ached. Just
as it ached this time yesterday. No, he didn’t want to
think about yesterday. How his arms ached with that
digging! He ought to have caught cold, too, seeing how
it had been raining, but he hadn’t. Pure Scotch Whisky.
Very plain on the bottle, but it was good stuff inside. God,
but it was! An indescribably passionate longing to drink
came over him, and he scraped his chair back from the
table and fetched the corkscrew from the sideboard
drawer. He drew the cork rapidly and dexterously. Not
a scrap fell into the bottle. Then he found himself a
tumbler and stood it beside the bottle. There was no
soda-water left after last night, but he didn’t want soda-water.
He didn’t want anything besides the relief that he
knew a few sips of that yellow liquid would bring him.
He fingered the bottle lovingly, still standing by the table.
Suddenly he became aware of his children’s gaze upon
him. Glad of the distraction from the drudgery of homework,
they had been sitting silently watching his every
movement. With a gust of fury Marble realized that it
was impossible for him to drink with those solemn eyes
upon him. He put the bottle down again upon the table
with a thump.</p>

<p>‘Confound you kids!’ he said furiously. ‘Why on earth
aren’t you in bed?’</p>

<p>Neither child spoke. The doom was close upon them
again, they knew, and this time it was more than could
be hoped for for another new arrival to postpone it, as
had happened so miraculously yesterday. But if they kept
quiet and pretended to be closely occupied with their
work it might be all aright. They buried their noses in
their books. Marble could only see the tops of their heads,
moving a little as they pored over their writing.</p>

<p>‘Bah!’ he said. ‘Don’t act about like that. Shut up those
books and go to bed. At once, now.’</p>

<p>Under more favourable circumstances they would have
protested that it was not nearly bedtime yet. They should
have pointed out that it was only a little after seven
o’clock, and they were entitled to another hour at least.
But they knew, in the intuitive manner of children, that
this time the less they said the better for them. They
began silently to pack up their books.</p>

<p>‘Go to bed! Go to bed!’ raved Mr Marble.</p>

<p>‘Don’t look at me like that, sir,’ thundered Mr Marble.
He had suddenly become half hysterical with rage. He
pounded on the table with the whisky bottle, crazy with
thwarted eagerness. John turned his scowling face in
another direction, but the expression on his face was unchanged,
and served to drive his father more frantic than
ever, if that were possible. He reached out and struck the
boy a heavy blow with his open hand, making him
stagger.</p>

<p>They went, without a word, but the scowl on John’s
face had somehow something triumphant about it now.
If he was going to be sent to bed in arbitrary fashion, he
would at least see that his father lost his temper during
the process. John always felt he disliked his father during
these queer moods of his—and the moods were becoming
more and more frequent too.</p>

<p>The children went, and Mr Marble sighed with relief.
He dragged his armchair up to the fire, and put the
small table beside it for his glass. He would wait and be
quite methodical now that a drink was an immediate
certainty. He poured himself out a moderate drink and
tossed it off. He felt better at once, more peaceful, more
<span class='it'>safe</span>. He refilled his glass, and set it beside him. Then he
sat down comfortably by the fire and gazed at the leaping
flames. This was just what he wanted to do yesterday,
before that wretched boy turned up and spoilt his evening.
But it was even better than yesterday, because then
he had only three drinks in the decanter. Now he had a
whole bottle full, which would last him for this evening
at least, without any thought of stinting. It was fine not
having to stint. He wouldn’t have to stint in any direction
at all for another two weeks at least, thank goodness, or
for a lot more than that, if only he were to change those
five-pound notes. And after all, why shouldn’t he? Of
course the one-pound notes were as safe as anything, but
the fivers ought to be just as safe too. They wouldn’t
give anything away, even if they were traced from Medland
to himself. And if he took care and only cashed them
at places where he wasn’t known they wouldn’t be traced
at all. Anyway what did it all matter? It was silly to
think that he was going to all the trouble he went to last
night just to pay off a miserable thirty pounds of debts.
Better to be hung for a sheep than for a lamb. Stop! Why
was he thinking about hanging?</p>

<p>Mrs Marble, re-entering from the kitchen, saw her husband
reach out greedily for the glass on the table at his
side, and swallow its contents in violent gulps. Then she
knew that dear Will would be unapproachable for the
rest of the evening, and she would not be able to have
that pleasant chat with him about what Jim had done for
them that she had been looking forward to all day. Mrs
Marble was rather disappointed.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER III</span></h1></div>

<p>Yet for some weeks Mr Marble hesitated about changing
those five-pound notes. He was of mixed character. When
he had been a rat in a corner he had fought like one,
desperately, to the last risk, but now he had escaped he
thought of nothing except flight and covering his tracks.</p>

<p>And he was paying heavily enough for those few
Treasury notes. That heart of his which had thumped so
heavily on that stormy evening thumped just as heavily
at other times now. He could not keep his mind from
working out possible occurrences in the future, and some
new morbid thought of the arrival of the police, instigated
by the officials of Medland’s hotel, or of some unexpected
inquiry by the Bank as to whence had come the money
which had so suddenly come into his possession, would
set his heart pounding away until he could only lean back
in his chair and gasp. He would wake sweating in the
night too, with the fevered blood running hot under his
skin, as some fantastic possibility developed in his sleeping
mind. Then he would writhe and toss in his bed, muttering
faintly to himself, tortured with fears of the known
and of the unknown. And sometimes, when he had been
sleeping very badly, one or two horrible memories returned
to him: memories of a pair of staring eyes, and of
a boyish face, the mouth smeared with foam. That was
the worst of all.</p>

<p>He was not even happy sitting alone in the dining-room
at Malcolm Road, with a full bottle of his only friend
beside him, and calm in the knowledge that <span class='it'>no one was
poking about in the garden</span>. The whisky only made him
think the more at first. It took a long time before he
could stop his mind from thinking about what might
happen, and he soon found the worst moments of all were
those at the beginning of the evening, when the whisky
only bit and did not deaden. At times the prospect so
frightened him that he flinched from his preliminary
torture, and would go through the evening without drinking
at all, although every fibre of his body seemed to
be shrieking for it. These were the times when he craved
for the company of his wife and children; when he would
encourage Annie to long monologues about how she had
spent her day. To Marble, sitting back in his chair, with
Annie droning away beside him about her encounter with
the baker’s boy, who now worked for the butcher instead,
and how she went down Rye Lane to buy remnants at the
sale, and what Mr Brown, the insurance agent, had to
say, it seemed incredible that anything unusual had happened.
It must have all been a wild dream. If it were
reality, how then could he be sitting at his fireside so
peacefully? Brief monosyllables were sufficient to keep
Annie talking and Mr Marble had ample time to think of
all this. It was too like a fantastic nightmare for anything
really to have happened in this very room, this poky,
stuffy, suburban dining-room, and for a terrible secret to
be hidden away in the garden just outside. Drugged by
Annie’s talk, or by John’s or Winnie’s chatter about
school, Mr Marble not infrequently succeeded in persuading
himself that it was indeed a dream. And Annie
was so pleasantly fluttered and flattered by his attention
in listening to her like this! But when night came, Mr
Marble paid for his relaxation. Then, on the verge of
sleep, he would realize that it was not a dream—and he
would spend the night turning and tossing in fevered
anxiety.</p>

<p>Security came back gradually. It was not a feeling of
complete security; rather was it a feeling that anything
would be welcome if only it would happen. No policeman
came prying round 53 Malcolm Road; no official from
the hotel came to ask as to the present whereabouts of
one James Medland. Marble had paid his debts, every one
of them, like a sensible man, and that had taken all the
slender store of one-pound notes. But his personal expenses
were much higher nowadays—they were bound to
be while he spent half a sovereign a day on whisky—and
nothing he could say to Annie had any effect in reducing
household expenditure. The old rule became well established
of spending a little more than his income. Under
such circumstances it was inevitable that the five-pound
notes should begin to melt away. He was very careful
about it, as his bank clerk experience taught him to be.
Not one of those rustling pieces of paper ever passed
through the hands of one of the local tradesmen, and
most certainly never did one go through Mr Marble’s
account at the Bank.</p>

<p>Occasionally at the big, gilded, popular Corner Houses
was to be seen a little round-faced man sitting alone. He
ordered an expensive dinner, as expensive as the limited
menu allowed, and he would eat it hurriedly and furtively,
with never a glance from his pale-blue eyes at the
people at the other tables, and having eaten he would call
for his bill and hurry out. He paid the bill by means of
a five-pound note, and, thrusting the change into his
pocket, he would rush away as though pursued. So he was
pursued, too. One pursuer was an impossible fear of
one of the frock-coated floorwalkers stopping him and
asking him whence came the note—with a meaning glance
to an attendant to fetch the waiting detective—and the
other was the haunting fear lest there might be someone
casually finding out something in a desolate back garden
in a dreary street in a southern suburb. Mr Marble learned
what it meant to walk down that street with that foolish
heart of his pounding away in his breast, hot with impatience
to reach home to ensure that all would be well,
and yet standing hesitating at his front gate unable to
go in to face what might be there—police, or, what would
be nearly as bad, a look in the eyes of his wife and children
and words unspoken that meant that they <span class='it'>knew</span>.
And still nothing happened.</p>

<p>The thing that came in the end was not in the least
what he expected. It was nine o’clock in the evening, and
Mr Marble was sitting in the same frowsty dining-room,
from minute to minute gauging with his eye the two
most important things of the moment—the height of the
whisky in the bottle and the distance the hands of the
clock had moved round. His wife was in the room too,
but she made no sign of her presence save for her whispered
conversation with herself. A smart rebuff from her
husband earlier in the evening had shown her that it was
not one of his ‘nice’ evenings. But when the postman
knocked she rose and went to fetch what he had brought.
It was only a single letter, and she gave it to Will. He
fumbled it open with whisky-tangled fingers, and read the
enclosed typewritten note with whisky-dazzled eyes. He
read it three times before he understood the words, and
for five minutes following he sat quite still as their significance
came slowly home to him. It was formal notice to
quit the house known as 53 Malcolm Road.</p>

<p>It was next morning before he could convince himself
that the peril was not as real as his shrinking mind had
believed last night. He was safe enough at present, of
course. The Rent Act confirmed him in his tenancy for
as long as it endured. This formal notice to quit was
merely a necessary preliminary to raising his rent. But
it gave him real cause for anxiety. It showed him a concrete
thing to be afraid of, instead of the wild nightmares
of prying neighbours or stray dogs, which might dig in
that disused flower-bed. Some time or other he might be
compelled to leave the house, and what would happen
then? He did not know.</p>

<p>The next evening the librarian at the local Public
Library had an interview with a little man in a seedy,
blue suit, with a ragged, red moustache and weak blue
eyes, who went through the formalities to obtain a ticket
and then demanded a selection of books on crime.</p>

<p>‘I am afraid we have very few books on the subject,’
said the librarian, surprised.</p>

<p>‘Never mind, let’s see what you have got,’ replied
Marble.</p>

<p>The librarian brought him an armful of books. There
were two of Lombroso’s works, a volume of medical jurisprudence,
two or three stray works on prison reform and
kindred subjects, while from the bottom of the heap the
librarian produced apologetically a rather lurid volume
on <span class='it'>Crimes and Criminals: Historic Days at the Assizes</span>.
Marble took the pile into his trembling hands, and
peered at them anxiously.</p>

<p>‘I’ll have this one,’ he said, firmly, <span class='it'>Crimes and Criminals</span>
in his hand.</p>

<p>The librarian dated it and handed it over unwillingly.
For one class of book borrower he had a friendly feeling;
for another he had toleration, seeing that it was the main
support of the library. The one class was that of the
humble clerk and mechanic, anxious for self-improvement,
the other was that of the diligent reader of fiction.
For the omnivorous browser who read all sorts of things,
he had a virulent hatred, suspecting him of a prurient
desire to lay hold of those books which even a Public
Library has to a small extent, the gift of some careless
donor, or (dangerously, in his opinion) termed ‘classical’.
And this newcomer was evidently a bad example of this
type. His perverted taste was obviously sated even with
Public Library fiction, and the craving for sensation was
worse, to his mind, even than the physiological researches
of spotty-faced adolescents. He had taken the book of all
the library of which the librarian was most ashamed. He
shook his head sadly after the receding, bent-shouldered
figure.</p>

<p>But that was the first night for months that Mr Marble
did not drink more than was good for him. <span class='it'>Crimes and
Criminals</span> held him fascinated. It was not a subject of
which he knew very much; he was even ignorant of the
details of ordinary criminal procedure. In this book he
found criminals labelled as ‘great’; he read ghastly stories
of passion and revenge; he read of the final scenes on the
scaffold with the dreadful concentration of a bird on a
snake.</p>

<p>And the hair bristled on his head, and he experienced
a horrible sensation of despair as he gradually realized
that two out of every three of the criminals mentioned
came to grief through inability to dispose of the body.
There was a tale of a woman who had walked for miles
through London streets with a body in a perambulator;
there was an account of Crippen’s life in London with
the body of his murdered wife buried in his cellar; but
the police laid hold of them all in time. On this damning
difficulty the book dwelt with self-righteous gusto. At
midnight Mr Marble put the book aside sick with fear.
He was safe at present; indeed, he was safe altogether on
many accounts. As long as he could see that that flower-bed
was undisturbed no one would know that there was
any cause for suspicion at all. That nephew of his had
vanished into the nowhere that harbours so many of
those whose disappearance is chronicled so casually in
the papers. There was nothing, absolutely nothing, to
connect him, the respectable Mr Marble, with young
Medland’s annihilation. But once let some fool start investigations,
even involuntary ones, in that flower-bed,
and the fat would be in the fire. Mr Marble did not know
whether identification would be possible at this late date—he
made a mental note that he must get another book
from the library in which he could look that up—but
even if that were impossible there would be unpleasant
inquiries, and he would be in trouble for certain. Come
what may, either he must maintain complete control over
that flower-bed, or else he must make some other adequate
arrangements. And from those ‘arrangements’, whatever
they might be, his soul shrank in utter dread. They were
certain to be his ruin. There would be some unforeseen
mishap, just as there had been to the cart in which that
man in the book tried to carry his victim’s remains along
Borough High Street. Then he would be found out and
then——? Prison and the gallows, said Mr Marble to
himself, with the sweat pouring in torrents down his face.</p>

<p>One thing would give him security, and that would be
the purchase of his house. That would give him security
against disturbance for the rest of his life. Mr Marble did
not mind what happened after his death, as long as that
death was not accelerated by process of law.</p>

<p>But how could Mr Marble possibly purchase his house?
He was living beyond his income as it was, he told himself,
with a grim recollection of five-pound notes changed
in Popular Corner Houses. Yet he must, he must, he must.
The blind panic of the earlier months had changed to a
reasoned panic now; the one object of Mr Marble’s life
now was to raise enough money to buy that house. The
covering letter to yesterday’s notice to quit had hinted
that perhaps Mr Marble would find it to his advantage
to buy instead of continuing to rent; Mr Marble went
to bed, to toss and mutter at his wife’s side all night
long as he framed impossible schemes for acquiring
money, a great deal of money, enough to buy the freehold
of 53 Malcolm Road.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER IV</span></h1></div>

<p>At the Bank, as was only to be expected, they had noticed
a slight change in Mr Marble’s manner of late. He always
looked worried, and clearly often he had been drinking.
The head of the department to whom Mr Marble acted
as second-in-command noticed it frequently, but he took
no drastic action. For one thing, he was glad to have an
inefficient second, as that enabled him to keep the work
more closely under his own hand, thereby making his
retention of his job more probable, and for another he
had a queer sort of liking for ‘poor old Marble’, with his
worried expression, and his worried eyes, and his worried
moustache. In fact, Mr Henderson was heartily glad that
Marble had apparently struggled out of the financial
difficulties which had for many months before made him
come to Henderson borrowing a fortnight before pay-day.
What Henderson did not realize was that for all Marble’s
looseness of fibre, and seeming incompetence to grapple
with anything worth while, somewhere in Marble there
was a keen mind—razor keen still, despite too much
whisky of late—and a fount of potential fierce energy
which might contrive wonderful things if only something
were to rouse him sufficiently. Mr Henderson, of course,
knew nothing of a piece of work that Marble had performed
marvellously efficiently some months ago.</p>

<p>So far Mr Marble had found no opportunity of making
the money that he hankered after so pathetically. Yet
money was in the air all the time that he was working,
more so even than is usually the case in a bank department.
For the department of the County National Bank,
of which Mr Henderson was executive chief, with Mr
Marble as his chief assistant, dealt solely with foreign
exchange, buying and selling money all day, dollars for
cotton spinners, francs for <span class='it'>costumiers</span>, pesetas for wine
merchants, and dollars, francs, pesetas, and, above all,
marks, for speculators of every trade or none. Gambling
in foreign exchange was becoming a national habit by
which the National County Bank profited largely. Here, if
anywhere, would Mr Marble win the money for which
he thirsted. But Mr Marble knew too much about foreign
exchange operations, and he was afraid. There had been
times when he had made a pound or two by well-timed
buying and selling, but not many. He had the example
before him of those who had bought marks at prices
seemingly lower than they could ever be again, only to
see them change from the absurd thousands to the still
more absurd hundred thousands which meant the loss of
nine-tenths of their investment. The wise man who speculated
in foreign exchange would do well to sell, not buy,
in most cases. And one could not sell without first buying
unless one could arrange a ‘forward operation’ with a
bank. One can only profit by a falling market if one sells
what one has not got. And no bank would allow anyone
to arrange a forward operation unless he could show
some sort of reason for wanting to do so. Not much
reason, of course, but a good deal more than a mere bank
clerk with sixty pounds only in his account could possibly
show. There was another advantage about the forward
operation, too. It was only necessary in this case to put
up a margin of ten per cent of one’s investment. In that
case an increase of five per cent in the value of the sum
controlled meant an actual profit on the sum invested of
fifty per cent—if one were lucky enough to have bought;
if one had sold instead it meant a loss of fifty per cent.
If a man were to buy on a ten per cent margin, and the
money bought were to double in value, he would multiply
the money invested not by two, but by twenty. Mr
Marble thought of the sixty pounds he had to invest, and
his mouth watered.</p>

<p>But week followed dreary week and nothing could be
done. The foreign exchange market seemed to have gone
mad. The mark had fallen away to millions, as the
Austrian crown had done two years before. The lira
seemed to be going the same way. Sterling exchange on
New York alone was struggling back to its pre-war position.
Even the franc was dropping steadily. Before the
war it was little more than 25; now it was over a hundred,
and it was being hammered slowly lower and lower. Mr
Marble watched the market and hesitated. If the franc
and the lira were to drop with a crash as the mark had
done, and a wise man had sold in advance, he could look
for a profit to be reckoned in terms of thousands per
cent. And the brokers with whom Mr Marble in the
course of his daily duties conversed over the telephone all
seemed to think it likely. In the foreign exchange department
of the National County Bank (Head Office) all the
clerks were convinced of the same thing. Some of them
had already made minute sums of money by cautious
speculation, helped by their friends the clerks in the
brokers’ offices. They had sold tiny sums in advance, got
out hurriedly immediately afterwards, and then cursed
their faint-heartedness as the franc still went on dropping.
Mr Marble saw all this, and was tempted. Twice he
nearly ventured but each time that keen judgement of his
which was always somewhere in the background ready to
be called upon held him back. There was something
doubtful somewhere.</p>

<p>And then one morning it happened. Chance flung a
fortune within Mr Marble’s reach, and only asked from
him in return the effort to grasp it.</p>

<p>It was ten o’clock in the morning. Mr Marble was at
his desk farthest from the entrance to the room, and
close beside the partitioned cubbyhole that housed the
superior majesty of Henderson, chief of the department.
In front of Mr Marble lay the opened letters sent across
by the correspondence department, and he was casually
glancing through them to see that there was nothing
that the department could not cope with without troubling
Mr Henderson, or even higher authority still. They
were all just ordinary routine letters; notifications mainly,
from the various continental branches, of credits given
and of drafts honoured. Nothing of any import; the staff
of the department could handle them nearly all. Four
of them he picked out that he would have to answer;
two must go in to Henderson. The last letter was the most
ordinary of them all. It was the bi-weekly letter from the
Paris branch confirming the actions reported already by
cable and telephone. Mr Marble looked through it. Still
there was nothing of any interest. For a wonder the Paris
staff had made no mistake in decoding cables. Everything
had been done as ordered, and no hasty cable would have
to be sent countermanding some ridiculous blunder. No
forgeries, no failures. Yet Mr Marble read the letter to
the end, because the man who had written it was known
to him personally; it was Collins, who had worked under
him in that very department for a couple of years before
being sent out to Paris. He was a voluble fellow—‘chatty’,
Mr Marble described him to himself—and his volubility
was noticeable even in this official correspondence, for at
the end of the letter he had inserted a paragraph that was
quite unnecessary by all rules of routine. It was quite
brief for Collins, and merely said that more steadiness
might be noticed in the French franc in future, as it was
rumoured that the Government were taking the matter
in hand, and might even resort to ‘pegging’ on the London
exchange.</p>

<p>Mr Marble laid the letter down and gazed through the
dusty window at the uninviting view of other dusty windows
across the ventilation shaft. There might be something
in it. The franc was a point higher this morning
than at the close of yesterday. So much the trained foreign
clerk’s brain told him—Mr Marble could at two minutes’
notice give the rate of exchange on anywhere at any time
within the last two years—but Mr Marble was capable,
strange though it may seem, of doing more than that if
sufficiently stimulated. If the Republic took a hand in
restoring its foreign credit, it would do more than merely
keep it steady. Mr Marble suddenly recollected a nebulous
idea he had framed some time ago as to the best means
that would bring this about. He turned this idea over
in his mind. If they were to do <span class='it'>that</span>, the franc would
recover like a skyrocket. It would easily go to sixty; it
might even reach fifty, or perhaps even forty. It would
never be better than forty, decided Mr Marble, weighing
the chances with an acuteness of perception that would
have astonished him had he only thought about it. Most
likely it would be about sixty.</p>

<p>‘What’s Paris now, Netley?’ he asked a passing subordinate.</p>

<p>‘One-nineteen, one-seventeen,’ replied Netley over his
shoulder as he hurried on hoping that Mr Marble would
notice that he deliberately did not say ‘sir’.</p>

<p>Two points rise again, thought Mr Marble. There
might be some truth in the wild theories that had been
flashing through his brain. On the other hand, it might
be only one of the periodic and temporary recoveries that
were usual. The price might sag at any minute again. If
Mr Marble were to buy, he might find that he had bought
at the beginning of a fall instead of the beginning of a
rise. And if he were to buy on a margin—Mr Marble had
already in his mind a scheme to enable him to do so—then
the inevitable ten point fall would deprive him of
ninety per cent of his capital. But then—Mr Marble’s
silly heart was already bumping heavily against his ribs—the
sort of rise he thought possible would bring him in
nearly a hundred times the amount invested. Mr Marble
managed to keep his brain deadly clear despite the
thumping of his heart, just as he had done that memorable
evening some months ago. It was a chance. Mr
Marble’s brain sorted out all the tiny indications it had
collected and stored up unbidden for weeks past. It was
more than a chance. It was a certainty, decided that clear
brain.</p>

<p>Yet Mr Marble felt the flush of blood in his cheeks, and
his heart beat unbearably as he rose from his seat and
walked out of the office on what was to be one of the
momentous occasions of his life. Even his gait was a little
unsteady so great was the strain upon him, and the
younger clerks whom he had to pass on the way to the
door nudged each other merrily as he went by.</p>

<p>‘Old Marble going out for his usual,’ they said. ‘Bit
early even for him. Must have been properly soused last
night.’</p>

<p>There was a public-house round the corner, and it was
there that Mr Marble stayed his steps, just as, be it admitted,
he had often done before. The girl at the bar
knew him, and the double Scotch was ready for him
before even he was within reach of it. But Mr Marble did
not, as was usual, drain it off and demand another.
Instead, he withdrew, glass in hand, to a bench behind a
table, and sat waiting, waiting inexorably, while his heart
beat in his finger tips so that his hands shook. It was only
just opening time, and there was a steady stream of
entrants, stockbrokers and clerks, street-betting agents, all
the curious mixture that is to be found in a public-house
fifty yards from Threadneedle Street on a weekday
morning.</p>

<p>Once or twice men he knew entered, and nodded, but
Mr Marble was not cordial. His return nod carried with
it no invitation to share his bench and sit at his table
with him. Most probably none of them would have
accepted such an invitation anyway, unless it were unavoidable.
Mr Marble continued to stare at the swing
doors.</p>

<p>And then Mr Marble’s heart gave a convulsive throb.
He suddenly felt sick with fear, fear of the future. At last
his scheme was presented to him in the concrete, instead
of the comfortably abstract. For a wild moment he
thought of flight, of abandoning the whole business. He
could, he knew. He might struggle along for years without
the aid that improbable success in this venture would
bring him. But Mr Marble thrust the temptation on one
side, and proceeded with the business with bitter determination.
He beckoned to Saunders, the man whose entrance
had caused this last internal commotion.</p>

<p>Saunders had his drink in his hand; he had greeted
those men at the bar whom he knew, and was glancing
round the room to make sure that he had missed no one.</p>

<p>He was a plump man of middle height, rosy and prosperous
looking. He knew Marble slightly; that is to say,
he had talked to him a dozen times in that public-house.
He was acquainted with the fact that Marble worked for
the National County Bank, which he himself employed,
and that was all. Naturally he was a little puzzled at
Marble’s beckoning to him, but Saunders took care to be
friendly to everyone who spoke to him, seeing that his
livelihood depended on the goodwill of the public. Saunders
was a bookmaker, in a tiny office five stories up near
Old Broad Street, conducting his business almost entirely
by telephone and by the men who waited about at lunchtime
near the corners of the streets.</p>

<p>Glass in hand, Saunders came across to the table just as
Marble had done before him, and almost without knowing
it he sat down opposite him. There was that in
Marble’s manner which seemed to make it inevitable that
he should sit down.</p>

<p>‘Well,’ said Saunders cheerily, ‘how’s things?’</p>

<p>‘Not too bad,’ said Marble. ‘Got ten minutes to spare?’</p>

<p>Saunders supposed he had, a little ruefully, though, for
he had at first imagined that this was merely evidence
of a desire to open a credit account with him, and, since
Marble’s manner did not indicate this, he came to the
other conclusion, that he was about to hear a ‘hard luck
story’. As far as Saunders’ experience went, men between
themselves did nothing but bet or borrow.</p>

<p>‘You do bank with the National County, don’t you?’
began Marble.</p>

<p>‘You’re right.’</p>

<p>‘And you know I work there?’</p>

<p>‘Right again. What’s the matter? Firm going bust?
My account overdrawn?’ Saunders was a witty fellow;
there never was the slightest chance of the National
County suspending payment, and Saunders’ account was
never lower than four hundred pounds. But Marble
hardly smiled. Instead, he turned his bleak eyes full
upon Saunders’ brown ones.</p>

<p>‘No,’ he said; then slowly, ‘I want to do a deal, and I
must have the help of a customer of the bank. You’ll do,
or, of course, if you don’t want to come in, I’ll have to
get someone else.’</p>

<p>‘I should think you were right again,’ said Saunders,
but he was not feeling quite so full of levity now. His
puzzled mind was searching for Marble’s motives. Either
this seedy old boy was balmy or else he was on some
illegal lay. In either case Saunders was not having any.
Saunders was a law-abiding man, save in the matter of
inciting others to street-betting. And yet—and yet——</p>

<p>‘Do you want to hear about it?’ said Marble, grimly.
He had himself as well in hand as when he had offered
Medland that glass of whisky, but the effort was frightful.
His confidence overbore Saunders’ easy scepticism.</p>

<p>‘Right-ho. I don’t say I’ll buy it, though,’ added Saunders
hastily.</p>

<p>‘No. But I want your word that you’ll keep quiet if
you don’t.’</p>

<p>Saunders agreed. And the word of a bookmaker is
accepted all over England.</p>

<p>‘I’ve got some information. It might mean a lot of
money if it were used properly.’</p>

<p>‘Racin’ information?’ There was a suspicion of a sneer
in Saunders’ voice: he obtained half his income from
people with racing information.</p>

<p>‘No. Foreign exchange.’</p>

<p>‘Don’t hardly know what that is.’</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble. ‘Lots of people don’t.’</p>

<p>‘Oh, I know a bit,’ said Saunders, anxious to justify
himself. ‘I know about how the mark has fallen to half
nothing and—and—all that sort of thing, you know.’</p>

<p>Somehow the moral tables had turned during those
few minutes. Undoubtedly Marble was now in the
ascendant. Largely, of course, this change was due to the
fact that the conversation was about a subject of which
he knew much and the other nothing. But on the other
hand it must be admitted that the vague thing known
as ‘Personality’ was affecting the case, too. Marble was
putting out all his strength to influence Saunders unobtrusively,
and he was succeeding. Men can do much when
they have to.</p>

<p>‘Well,’ said Marble, bleak eyes set like stones, ‘the franc
is going to rise, and now is the time to buy.’</p>

<p>The secret was out now. Saunders could betray him
now at leisure. But Marble, never taking his eyes off
Saunders’, was sure he would not.</p>

<p>‘I don’t say you’re not right,’ said Saunders, ‘but what’s
the little game? Where do I come in? And where do you
come in?’</p>

<p>‘It’s like this,’ said Marble, showing his whole hand, so
sure was he. ‘It isn’t much good buying francs outright.
I could do that myself next door. But you don’t stand to
make much that way. This time you might make a hundred
per cent, but of course that’s not good enough.’</p>

<p>‘Of course not,’ said Saunders submissively.</p>

<p>‘The best way to do it is to make a “forward operation”
of it. That means you must put up ten per cent.’</p>

<p>‘On a margin,’ put in Saunders, proud of this little
bit of argot picked up during much frequenting of City
public-houses.</p>

<p>‘Exactly. On a margin. That means that a five per cent
rise in the franc gives you fifty per cent profit. As I said,
it might be a hundred per cent rise this time. That would
be a thousand per cent profit—ten to one, in other
words,’ added Marble, countering Saunders’ effort.</p>

<p>Saunders only dimly understood.</p>

<p>‘But I don’t see now why you’re telling me all this,’
he said. ‘Why don’t you get along and do it? Why tell
anyone else at all?’</p>

<p>‘Because I’m not allowed to put a forward operation
through for myself in the Bank. You have to have some
legitimate reason for wanting to.’</p>

<p>‘And what reason would <span class='it'>I</span> have?’ Saunders was being
rapidly drawn into the net.</p>

<p>‘Oh, that’s easy. You can easily have some business in
France, can’t you? Don’t you ever bet on French races?’</p>

<p>‘Of course I do, sometimes.’</p>

<p>‘And don’t you ever send money to France?’</p>

<p>‘Well, I have done, once or twice.’</p>

<p>‘Right, then. If you were to tell the Bank that you
wanted to buy francs they’d believe you all right. And
they love you in the Bank, anyhow. You keep a big
current account, and they love anyone who does that.’</p>

<p>Saunders was still struggling against the mesmeric
influence that was beginning to overpower him.</p>

<p>‘Tell me some more about this “forward operation”
stunt,’ he pleaded, wavering, conscious that in a minute
he would have to decide one way or the other, conscious
that he would most probably fall in with Marble’s plans,
and conscious, too, that he did not really want to. ‘Tell
me what I should have to do.’</p>

<p>Marble explained carefully, drilling it into his man
with meticulous care. Then he threw his last bait. He
showed how, if a man were to take his profit when it
amounted to a mere five times his stake, and had the
hardihood to fling both profits and stake into the business
again, by the time the currency purchased stood
at twice the figure it stood at at the start, the profit would
not be ten, but thirty-five units.</p>

<p>Saunders scratched his head wildly.</p>

<p>‘Here, what are you drinking?’ he asked, signalling
agitatedly to the barman, and then leaning forward
again to go over the details once more. Marble’s cold
judgement had chosen his man well. A bookmaker earns
his living by other people’s gambling, but even with this
practical example always before him there is no one on
earth so ready to gamble—in anything not pertaining to
the turf.</p>

<p>Then Saunders made a last despairing effort to writhe
out of the business. He said that, after all, he was unacquainted
with Marble.</p>

<p>‘How do I know it’s straight?’ he asked pitifully.</p>

<p>‘It can’t be very well anything else, can it?’ replied
Marble, and the condescension in his tone was an added
spur to Saunders. ‘<span class='it'>I</span> won’t be able to pinch your money,
will I? It will all be in your account, won’t it? If it isn’t
straight I can’t make anything out of it.’</p>

<p>Saunders had realized this as soon as the words had left
his mouth, and he apologized. Mr Marble, hope boiling
in his veins, was very gracious.</p>

<p>‘Well, what is it you want out of it?’ asked the wretched
Saunders.</p>

<p>‘Ten per cent of what you make,’ said Marble uncompromisingly,
‘and, of course, I’m going to have a bit on,
too.’</p>

<p>‘How much?’</p>

<p>‘Sixty quid.’ Mr Marble produced a roll of five-pound
notes—the last of those he had been so careful about
changing. He was throwing discretion to the winds now.
If ever the notes were traced to him, it would be his own
fault, but there was no time for complicated manœuvres
to change them.</p>

<p>Saunders took them half involuntarily.</p>

<p>‘In fact,’ said Mr Marble, ‘I should like to have more
than that on. Only I haven’t got it with me. I could raise
it by to-morrow. But to-morrow will be too late.’</p>

<p>With those baleful eyes upon him, and the reassuring
feel of those five-pound notes in his hand, Saunders could
do nothing except make the inevitable offer.</p>

<p>‘Thanks,’ said Marble. ‘Look here, I tell you what we’ll
do. Put four hundred in. Two hundred of that will be
yours. There’s another sixty. Then you lend me the odd
one-forty. That makes us just even.’</p>

<p>Saunders agreed helplessly.</p>

<p>‘Time’s getting on,’ said Mr Marble, with a glance at
the clock. ‘We’d better get a move on. I can tell you
what to do all over again as we walk back.’</p>

<p>As though in a dream Saunders rose from the table
and followed him out. The stimulus of the fresh air
outside revived him sufficiently to remember to ask
Marble how it was he was so certain that the franc was
going to rise.</p>

<p>‘I know all right,’ said Marble casually. He could afford
to be casual, so sure was he of himself, and above all, so
sure was he of Saunders.</p>

<p>And Saunders weakly yielded to the man with the
superior knowledge. He would have hooted with derision
at a man who proposed to back a stray acquaintance’s
favourite horse to the tune of two hundred pounds; he
would have rolled on the ground with mirth if he heard
that the same man was going to risk another one hundred
and forty by backing that horse for his friend; but
this was not horse-racing, about which he was thoroughly
well informed. It was business—Big Business—and he
was awed and submissive.</p>

<p>Marble ended his instructions just as they reached the
main door of the National County Bank.</p>

<p>‘Go in there and say you want to buy francs as a
forward operation. They’ll send you along to my department,
so don’t worry. I’ll be there. I may even do the
business for you. But I expect it’ll be Henderson that you
see. Oh, yes, and don’t forget, whatever you do, to ring
me up two or three times to-day and to-morrow. Get
through to Foreign Exchange and then ask for me. It
doesn’t matter what you say. Just say—what is that you
always say when you see anyone in the bar?—“Hallo, old
bean, how’s things?” Keep it up for a bit; say “Doodle-oodle-oodle”
if you can’t think of anything else. That’s
just to give me authority to move the account about when
it’s necessary. Got it all? All right, then. Good-bye.’</p>

<p>Mr Saunders, dazed and mazed, walked weakly into
the National County Bank. Mr Marble walked on to
the side entrance where dwelt his own among other departments.
The sweat was running off him in streams;
for a brief space he had been a master of men; he had
swayed a hard-headed man into doing something totally
unexpected; he had gambled with fate and he had won;
for a while he had known the wild exultation of success.
He had done something that he would certainly not
have done without the urgent impulse due to—a slight
indiscretion one stormy night some months ago, but reaction
closed upon him with terrible swiftness. His steps
dragged as he came into the department of Foreign
Exchange. He felt, and he looked, inexpressibly weary.
The junior clerks nudged each other again as he walked
by.</p>

<p>‘Old Marble’s had as much as he can carry already.
He’ll be getting the sack one of these days, just see if he
doesn’t.’</p>

<p>And Marble, tired to death, weary with fear, worn out
by the thumping of his heart, crept brokenly to his desk
and buried his face in his hands.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER V</span></h1></div>

<p>Mr Marble was paying. He was paying by the feeling
of weary misery from which he suffered as he walked
that day across London Bridge, as he stood exhausted
in the train, and in the bus which brought him from the
station, and as he sat in the back room at 53 Malcolm
Road.</p>

<p>It was a new habit this of sitting in the tiny ‘drawing-room’
instead of the dining-room. In the drawing-room
the light was bad and the furnishing even more dreary
than in the dining-room, while the fact that it was in
the dining-room that during the winter they had their
fire had habituated the family to passing all their time
there. But Mr Marble now sat in the drawing-room. He
did little enough there. He read, it is true, in the books
that he now chose regularly from the Free Library—crime
books, even the interminable <span class='it'>Lombroso</span>—but he
only read at intervals. Quite half the time he spent in
looking out of the window across the barren flower-bed.
That way he felt more comfortable. He did not have to
worry then in case some stray dog from one of the neighbouring
houses were there. Mr Marble had read how
dogs are employed to find truffles in Perigord and he was
afraid.</p>

<p>There were in addition various children from neighbouring
houses who had been known to climb into the
garden after balls which they had knocked over. They
had left off doing that now. Once upon a time Mr Marble
had not shown any active objection, but two or three
times lately he had caught them at it, and had rushed
out in blind, wordless fury. The children had seen his
face as he mouthed at them, and that experience was
enough for them. Children know these things more
clearly than do their elders, and they never came into
Mr Marble’s garden again. The neighbours were at a
loss to understand Mr Marble’s jealous guardianship of
his garden. As they said, he never grew anything there.
Gardening was hardly likely to be a hobby of a man
with Mr Marble’s temperament, and the garden of Number
53 had always been in its barren weediness an
unpleasing contrast to those near it.</p>

<p>It gave at least some cause for a feeling of superiority
to the neighbours. They all thought Mr Marble unbearably
snobbish. He sent his children to secondary schools—on
scholarships, it is true, and after some years at
public elementary schools—while their children began
to work for their livings at the age of fourteen, and he
wore a bowler hat, while the neighbouring menfolk wore
caps. They none of them liked Mr Marble, although they
all had a soft corner in their hearts for Mrs Marble. ‘Poor
thing, he treats her like the dirt beneath his feet, he does.’</p>

<p>It was a comforting feeling that this monster suffered
from the same troubles as they did, and was at times
unable to pay his rent, even as they, for so the collecting
clerk told them.</p>

<p>Mr Marble spent the evening sitting in the drawing-room
of 53 Malcolm Road; on his knee was the last of
the Free Library books on crime. It was very interesting—a
<span class='it'>Handbook to Medical Jurisprudence</span>. Until he had
begun it, Mr Marble did not know what Medical Jurisprudence
was, but he found it more and more absorbing.
The periods spent in gazing out of the window grew
shorter and shorter as he read all about inquests, and
the methods for discovering whether a dead body found
in the water had been put there after death or not, and
the legal forms necessary for certifying a person insane.
Then he passed on to the section of Toxicology. He read
all about the common domestic poisons, spirits of salt,
lead acetate, carbolic acid; from these the book proceeded
to the rarer poisons. The first ones mentioned, perhaps
given pride of place because of infinitely superior deadliness,
were hydrocyanic acid and the cyanides. The comments
on the cyanides were particularly interesting:</p>

<p>‘Death is practically instantaneous. The patient utters
a loud cry and falls heavily. There may be some foam
at the lips, and after death the body often retains the
appearance of life, the cheeks being red and the expression
unaltered.</p>

<p>‘Treatment——’</p>

<p>But Mr Marble did not want to know anything about
the treatment. Anyway, it was easy to see that there
would rarely be an opportunity of treating a sufferer
from cyanide poisoning. Besides, he did not want to read
the book at all after that. It made his stupid heart beat
too fast again, so that he had difficulty in breathing while
his hand shook like the balance-wheel of a watch. And
the book had started an unpleasant train of thought,
that set him once again gazing out into the garden, only
twilight now, at the end of the day, while he thought
about blank horrors.</p>

<p>He knew much more about crime than when he had
first become a criminal. He knew that nine murderers
out of ten were only discovered through some silly mistake.
Even if they were very careful about planning the
deed, and carried it out successfully, they still made some
ridiculous blunder that betrayed them. But in some cases
they were found out by some unfortunate mischance. It
was generally through the gossip of neighbours, but
sometimes it was through the insatiable curiosity of some
really uninterested person. Now Mr Marble could rely
upon there being no gossip. No one knew that young
Medland had come to his house that night. And he had
made no blunder. It was only some event beyond his
control that could betray him. Such as? The answer came
pat to mental lips—someone else moving into the house
after he had been turned out, <span class='it'>someone with a taste for
gardening</span>. Come what may, he must not be turned out
of 53 Malcolm Road. But he might be at any minute now.
His tortured mind raced like a steamship propeller in
a rough sea. Supposing the franc should fall! He would
lose his money, but that would be only part of his loss,
and the least part, too. For Saunders would complain
about his loss, perhaps even to the management of the
Bank, certainly in a way that would come to the ears of
the authorities. Then Marble would lose his job—not
possibly, but certainly. Then—a few weeks of grace perhaps,
and then, rent unpaid, out of the house he would
go. After that it was inevitable. Mr Marble shuddered
uncontrollably. It all depended on the franc. One part
of Mr Marble’s feverishly active mind began to toil once
more through all the data accumulated that had made
him decide that the franc would rise; another part began
to regret bitterly that he had ever entered into such an
absurd venture, rashly leaving his temporary safety—which
already he began to long for again—in a wild
search for permanency. Perhaps this was his blunder, like
Crippen’s flight to the Continent. Perhaps it was because
of this that he was going to be hanged by the neck till
he was dead. That other book, the one about Famous
Criminals, had been disgustingly fond of that expression.
Mr Marble shuddered again.</p>

<p>Mr Marble sat till late that night—indeed, he sat until
early the next morning, disregarding, hardly hearing the
appeals of his wife, working out with one part of his
mind the chances of the rise of the franc, with the other
the chances of escaping detection. Mr Marble found some
ghoulish details at the end of the <span class='it'>Handbook to Medical
Jurisprudence</span> which interested him as well as appalled
him. They dealt with the possibilities of identifying
bodies after prolonged burial.</p>

<p>At half-past seven the next morning, Mr Marble, who
was already awake—he hardly seemed to sleep nowadays—heard
the newspaper pushed through the letterbox of
the front door downstairs. He climbed out of bed and
padded down barefooted and in his pyjamas. The house
was very still, and it seemed as if the beating of his heart
shook it. It was unfortunate that it should start again
now when it had taken him all the time he was in bed
to quiet it down. But there was no help for it. Mr
Marble wondered whether the paper had anything to
say about the franc, and of course that was enough to
start it.</p>

<p>With the fibre doormat scratching his bare feet Mr
Marble stood and read the financial columns of the newspaper.
It was unenlightening. It mentioned the closing
price of the franc—118—one point better than he had
bought at. Mr Marble knew that already. Nowhere was
there any mention of drastic action by the French Government.
Everything seemed as it was yesterday. Mr
Marble realized that he might perhaps be able to get out
of the transaction even now with safety and a small
profit. That would perhaps keep Saunders’ mouth shut.
But Mr Marble only dallied with the idea for a moment.
Then his eyes narrowed, and his weak, nubbly chin came
forward an eighth of an inch. No. He would stick it out
now. He would carry the business through, cost what it
might. He was sick of being afraid. There was some quite
good stuff in the make-up of Mr William Marble. It was
a pity that it took danger of life and death to stir him
up to action.</p>

<p>Yet Mr Marble was so anxious that he called up to
his wife, ‘Aren’t you <span class='it'>ever</span> coming down, Annie?’ and he
bustled hastily through his dressing and breakfast and
rushed off to the City a good half-hour before his usual
time. No one in the crowded railway carriage guessed
that the little man in the blue suit perched in the corner,
his feet hardly touching the floor, who read his paper
with such avidity, was hastening to either fortune or
ruin, although perhaps a closer glance than ever Mr
Marble received might have raised some strange speculations,
considering his white face and his tortured light-blue
eyes. He did not walk across the bridge from the
station. Instead he scampered, breathlessly.</p>

<p>At the Bank he hung up his hat and coat carelessly,
and dashed upstairs to the department of Foreign Exchange.
The few clerks already there stared in wonder
at his unwontedly early arrival. Straight to Mr Henderson’s
room went Mr Marble, to that private sanctum
which only he and Henderson had the right to enter. He
looked at the tape machine. Fool that he was! Of course,
there would be no quotations through yet. He might as
well have stayed at home.</p>

<p>He came back to his desk, and sat down, making a pretence
of being busy, though this was difficult to maintain,
as the letters had not yet arrived. He waited for twenty
minutes while the room filled with late arrivals of the
one time-table and the early arrivals of the other. The
customary din of the office began to develop. The telephones
began to ring, and the clerks began to call to each
other from desk to desk. Mr Marble became conscious
that young Netley was speaking into the telephone
opposite. He knew from Netley’s greeting to the unknown
at the other end that he was talking to the exchange
brokers in London Wall.</p>

<p>‘Yes,’ said Netley, ‘yes, no, what, really? No, I hadn’t
heard, yes, yes, all right.’</p>

<p>Marble knew instinctively what he was talking about.</p>

<p>‘What’s Paris now, Netley?’ he asked.</p>

<p>Netley was so full of his surprising news that he did
not notice the coincidence, and also actually added the
hated ‘sir’.</p>

<p>‘Ninety-nine, sir,’ he said. ‘It’s gone up twenty points
in the night. They don’t know why, yet.’</p>

<p>Marble knew. He was right, of course. He had a good
head for finance when he chose to use it.</p>

<p>Henderson came in and passed through to his own
room. Marble did not notice him. He was busy thinking.
He was nerving himself to go on with the venture. If
he sold now he could give Saunders some three hundred
pounds profit—enough to satisfy him most probably.
Anyway, he was safe for a bit. Keeping in close touch
with the market as he naturally did, he could sell at the
instant a decline seemed likely. But if he did what he
had suggested to Saunders yesterday—sold out and then
reinvested, he would be much less safe. A ten per cent
drop would wipe out profit and capital as well, and
Saunders would think he had been swindled. But all
Marble’s judgement told him that the rise was bound to
continue. There was a huge gain to be made if only he
was bold enough—or desperate enough—to risk it. Henderson
appeared at the door of his room.</p>

<p>‘Mr Marble,’ he said, ‘someone wants you.’</p>

<p>Marble went in and picked up the receiver.</p>

<p>‘Hullo,’ he said.</p>

<p>‘That Mr Marble?’ said the receiver.</p>

<p>‘Hallo, old bean, how’s things?’ said the receiver.</p>

<p>It was Saunders. He had begun to regret his transaction
of the previous day long ago, but he was determined
on playing the game to the last. Marble might have got
four hundred pounds out of him by some nefarious
means, but he was not going to get a rise out of him as
well. He would see the thing through to the bitter end.</p>

<p>‘Going well,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>He had to pick his words, for Henderson was within
earshot, and it would never do for him to know that he
was acting in collusion with one of the Bank’s customers.</p>

<p>‘They’ve begun to rise,’ said Mr Marble. ‘Look at your
tape machine.’</p>

<p>Mr Saunders was unable to retain an exclamation of
surprised unbelief.</p>

<p>‘You can get out now with a bit of profit,’ said Mr
Marble. His tone was cold and sincere, as he was striving
to make it, and carried conviction.</p>

<p>‘Sorry, I can’t hear what you’re saying,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>‘Doodle—oodle—oodle,’ said the receiver, as Mr
Saunders realized that this was his cue, and all his old
gambling spirit came back to him.</p>

<p>‘Right. I think you’re wise,’ said Mr Marble, replacing
the receiver.</p>

<p>‘That Mr Saunders,’ said Marble to Henderson.
‘Bought some francs yesterday—lucky devil—wants to
sell and reinvest.’</p>

<p>In the outer office the usual nerve-racking bustle was
at its usual height. Mr Marble sat at his desk, where the
letters had now been put, and rallied himself. For nearly
five minutes he fought with himself before he could turn
to the telephone at his elbow and give the necessary
orders to increase Saunders’ holding—and the risk as
well.</p>

<p>There was apparently no need to worry. Mr Marble
sold at 95; he bought again at 93. Half an hour later the
franc stood at 87, and the risk was past. It is an old story
now, how the French Government had quietly appropriated
other people’s credits the night before, how the
franc rose all day long, while puzzled exchange brokers
racked their brains to explain the mystery, and cursed
their gods that they had not foreseen this action and
bought all the francs that their credit would stand. And
all day the franc rose, as men who had been caught hurried
in to cover their losses, as the German speculators
who had been hammering away so joyfully gave up the
struggle in despair, as the small investors who follow the
movements of the market far to the rear came panting in
to steal a slice of profit as well. The men in the office
who only a few days before had been confidently predicting
that the franc would go the way of the mark had
already changed their minds completely and were now
saying that it would climb to its pre-war value of twenty-five
and a quarter. But Mr Marble kept his head, just
as he had kept it that fatal night when he knew that
a single mistake meant ruin and violent death. The cold
fear that had succeeded to the initial feeling of elated
success vanished completely, and he was left calm, deadly
calm. He watched the market with a fierce intensity.
Once or twice it wavered, as the faint hearts took their
profits, but each time it recovered, as it was bound to
do with a genuine demand behind it. At 75 he resold
and reinvested again, sitting lunchless in the office all
day, so as to keep the business under his own hand, and
when the franc touched 65 he sold out for good. It might
well go a little higher, as indeed it did, reaching 60 for
a brief space, but he had done all that was necessary and
a good deal more.</p>

<p>There was no need to work out the profit. He knew
that already, counting with painful eagerness every
penny that every point meant to him. He called to the
department stenographer, and began the official Bank
letter to Saunders reporting the progress made:</p>

<div class='blockquote-right100percent'>

<p class='noindent'><span class='it'>Dear Sir</span>,</p>

<p><span class='it'>In accordance with your instructions received to-day
by telephone at 9.45 a.m. and 4.51 p.m. we have</span>——</p>

</div>

<p class='noindent'>and all the rest of the business. It was cold and dry and
formal enough, heaven knew. Bank letters are usually
cold and dry and formal, even when they embody a
pæan of praise. This one told, with an air of supreme
detachment, how Mr Saunders had originally bought
rather more than forty-five thousand francs with the four
thousand pounds represented by his margin of four hundred;
how they had been sold at 95, and then represented
nearly five thousand pounds (a thousand pounds profit);
how this thousand pounds, and the original four hundred,
had purchased francs at 93, and thus, thanks to
the fact that each pound did the work of ten, controlled
nearly a million and a quarter of francs; this million odd
had been sold at 75, bringing in sixteen thousand pounds
and more. Mr Saunders’ profit now stood at over four
thousand pounds, and it and the good old original four
hundred had gone back once more into francs, purchased
at 75 still, thanks to Mr Marble having taken
advantage of an eddy in the market. Forty-five thousand
pounds’ worth of francs did that sum control—three
millions of francs and a few thousand odd ones.</p>

<p>When they were finally sold at 65 Mr Saunders’ credit
balance stood at a paltry fifty-one thousand pounds. He
probably was unable to do the simplest sum in foreign
exchange; at the moment he did not have the least idea
of what profit he had made; Marble’s forethought had
earned it for him; most of the money would come
eventually out of the pockets of less fortunate speculators,
which only served them right, but some would
come from the myriad firms which had to have francs at
any price. Above all, if the Bank had had anything to
say in the matter they would probably have cut short
the speculation at the earliest opportunity, but they had
never been consulted after the first interview. Mr Marble
had a specious plea of justification for having done all
this on his own responsibility, in that Henderson had
acquiesced in the first expansion of the deal, but he
did not think he would have to use it. No bank really
objects to having its clients enriched by the enthusiasm
of its staff.</p>

<p>When the letter was finished Mr Marble slipped out
of the office. He had done no work that day, and he
would not have been able to even if he had tried. He
was too exhausted by the emotional strain under which
he had been labouring all these hours. Instead, he walked
quietly round to Saunders’ office. The hurrying crowds
round him, hastening to catch the 5.10 at Fenchurch
Street, or the 5.25 at London Bridge, did not pay him
the tribute of a glance. They did not realize that this
shabby man in blue was a capitalist—a man possessed
of over ten thousand pounds, <span class='it'>if he could be sure of
making Saunders pay up</span>. They paid no heed to him,
save to shoulder their homeward progress. He was rich
almost to the full extent of his wildest dreams, and yet
they pushed him into the gutter. Mr Marble did not
resent it. They had likewise paid no heed to him when
he was only a murderer.</p>

<p>Saunders in his office, the last race of the day over,
was glancing through some trial totals of the day’s figures
when one of his two clerks showed in Mr Marble.</p>

<p>‘Hallo?’ he said, glancing up, ‘so you’ve made a bit?’</p>

<p>Mr Marble sank wearily into the chair indicated and
took the cigarette that Saunders offered.</p>

<p>‘What did you get? Six to one?’ asked Saunders. He
was half joking, half serious. He had determined that
Mr Marble’s final bait of yesterday of three thousand
per cent was a mere piece of bluff. Obviously Marble had
taken a chance and it had come off, and he, glad to
see his money back, let alone with profit attached, would
not press him too hard for the fulfilment of all his
promises.</p>

<p>‘Don’t know,’ said Marble. ‘Haven’t worked it out
like that. But the total comes to something like fifty
thousand.’</p>

<p>‘What?’ gasped Saunders. ‘Fifty thousand? Or it’s
francs, I suppose you mean?’</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble expressionlessly, ‘pounds.’</p>

<p>‘D’you mean it?’</p>

<p>‘Oh, of course I do. You’ll get the official notification
from the Bank to-morrow.’</p>

<p>Saunders said nothing. Nothing in his limited vocabulary
was equal to the situation.</p>

<p>‘Fifty thousand pounds,’ said Mr Marble, still expressionless,
but bracing himself unobtrusively for the final
effort. ‘Let’s work out what my share of it is.’</p>

<p>It was astonishing to him to find that Saunders agreed
without any difficulty at all. He would not have been
surprised to find him refusing to render any account
whatever; he could have retained the whole and nothing
could have been proved against him. But Marble, when
he feared this, allowed his fear to overbalance his estimation
of several important items in Saunders’ make-up.
In the first place, Saunders was an honest man. In the
second place, he was so dazzled by the magnitude of the
profit that he did not grudge the fair share of the man
who had earned it for him. In the third place, he was a
bookmaker, and he was accustomed to handing over
large sums on account of transactions of which no law
in the United Kingdom took the slightest notice.</p>

<p>‘Rightio,’ said Saunders. ‘How much is it exactly?’</p>

<p>‘Fifty thousand, three twenty-nine, and a few shillings.’
Saunders hastily figured it out. Marble had done it in
his head long ago.</p>

<p>‘I make your little packet come to £27,681. Oh, and
the sixty you gave me. I get twenty-two thousand odd for
myself. Not bad going for three phone calls.’</p>

<p>Saunders was trying to be offhand in the presence of
this magician who could make thousands sprout in the
course of a night. Actually, he was bursting with astonishment
and curiosity.</p>

<p>‘When’s settling day?’ he demanded.</p>

<p>‘The money’ll come in soon. You’ll have it in less than
a week. Might be to-morrow, but I doubt it. The Bank
will let you know.’</p>

<p>‘Right. I’ll send you a cheque then. Your working
agree with mine?’ Saunders was trying his best to be the
complete business man, although the largest cheque he
had written in his life was for no more than five hundred
pounds, and that occasion still haunted him in his
worst nightmares.</p>

<p>‘Very well, then.’ Mr Marble rose from his chair.</p>

<p>Mr Saunders could retain himself no longer.</p>

<p>‘Oh, sit down, man, and tell me how it was done. No,
we must go and have a drink to celebrate this. Let’s
make a night of it, up West somewhere. Let’s——’</p>

<p>But none of these things appealed to Mr Marble,
although the very mention of a drink set him yearning.</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Mr Marble. ‘I have to push off home.’</p>

<p>And he went home, too. Although Mr Marble was
possessed of twenty-seven thousand pounds he spent his
evening, as long as he was sober, sitting in a dreary little
suburban drawing-room gazing out over a desolate suburban
backyard, for fear lest some trespasser or some
stray dog should find something out.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER VI</span></h1></div>

<p>Mr Marble arrived home one evening lighter of step
and of heart than he had been for some time previously.
Even when the shadow of the gallows lies across one’s
path one cannot help feeling a little elated when one
has just received, and paid into a new account at a new
bank, receiving the homage of a bank manager, the sum
of twenty-seven thousand pounds odd.</p>

<p>Mr Marble was done with speculation. The money, as
he had decided in a serious conference with the bank
manager, was all going into gilt-edged investments—save
for a thousand pounds which was destined for the purchase
of 53 Malcolm Road. Even with this deduction
Mr Marble would be in the possession of the comfortable
income of twelve hundred pounds a year, although—as
the bank manager said deprecatingly—the income-tax
collector would have a fat slice out of it.</p>

<p>So Mr Marble hung up his hat in the hall with a
freedom of gesture unusual to him, and marched briskly
into the dining-room to find his family assembled still
over the tail end of their tea.</p>

<p>‘You’re early, Will,’ said Mrs Marble, rising uncomplaining
to hurry the preparation of her husband’s
evening meal.</p>

<p>‘So I am, so I am,’ said Mr Marble, and threw himself
down in the armchair beside the empty grate.</p>

<p>It is a strange fact, but true, that Annie Marble’s habit
of saying the obvious did not get on his nerves. In that
lukewarm wooing, seventeen years ago, one of the things
that appealed most strongly to Mr Marble was the fact
that Annie did not say unexpected things, and that he
never had to bother about entertaining her. Yet at the
moment he had a little scene in his mind’s eye that
would startle her and interest her enormously, and he
had been looking forward to it for days.</p>

<p>‘What about school, John?’ he said.</p>

<p>John leisurely drank tea before replying. It was his
way.</p>

<p>‘All right,’ said John. He did not use three words
where two would do.</p>

<p>Mr Marble had guessed already that John would have
little to say, and the idea pleased him, for he knew
that his next words would force him into saying something
more than usual.</p>

<p>‘You’ll be leaving at the end of this term, John,’ he
said.</p>

<p>John put down his cup with a slight clatter and stared
at his father.</p>

<p>‘Really?’ he said.</p>

<p>Only one word this time. Somehow it irritated Mr
Marble.</p>

<p>‘Yes. I shall be entering you for the College next term.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble was doomed to disappointment. John said
nothing for a while. He was too stunned to speak. Nearly
four years at his secondary school had endeared the
place to him, and he had begun to look forward to the
alluring prospect of prefectship and ‘colours’. This cup
had been rudely snatched from his lips. And he was to
be sent to the College. Sydenham College was a public
school, one of the second rank only, though this subtle
distinction did not matter to John at that age, and there
was no love lost between the secondary foundation and
this lordly place, whose boys rode on motor-bicycles, and
turned up their noses at the rest of humanity.</p>

<p>It was this that made the sharpest appeal to John’s
dumb but sensitive little soul. At Sydenham College he
would be torn apart from the friends he had made
during four long summers. He, too, would have to turn
up his nose at Manton and Price and good old Jones,
whose glasses were always bent the wrong way. He
wouldn’t, of course, but—he realized this with a flash of
prophetic insight—they would <span class='it'>expect</span> him to and that
would be just as bad. For the moment John saw things
very clearly. At the College he would be received and
treated like a secondary boy, and at the School there
would be instinctive hostility towards him. He would
not be fish, nor fowl, nor good red herring.</p>

<p>‘Oh, say something, for goodness’ sake,’ said Mr
Marble, pettishly. ‘Don’t sit there staring like a stuffed
dummy.’</p>

<p>John addressed his eyes to his plate. ‘Thank you,
father,’ he said.</p>

<p>‘Confound it, boy,’ said Mr Marble, ‘anyone would
think you didn’t <span class='it'>want</span> to go there. The finest public
school in England, and you’re going there. And’—here
Mr Marble threw his finest bait—‘if you get on well there
and distinguish yourself, there might be that motor-bike
I’ve heard you talking about, some day.’</p>

<p>But the effort was vain. Even a motor-bicycle meant
nothing to John if it was conditional upon his going to
the College. If Mr Marble had only mentioned it before
he had mentioned the other, John’s reception of the
suggestions might have been different. As it was, John
could only mumble ‘thank you’ again and fidget with the
crumbs on his plate. Mr Marble turned from him
exasperated, and addressed his real favourite, Winnie,
instead.</p>

<p>‘And you, miss,’ he said, with a jocosity which, unwonted
as it was, had precisely the opposite effect to the
one he desired, ‘what do you want most?’</p>

<p>It was an unsatisfactory question to put suddenly to
an unprepared fourteen-year-old even if she was nearly
fifteen. Winnie thought and fumbled with her dress, and
looked away as she became conscious of the concentrated
gaze of everyone in the room. To her aid came the
recollection of what she most envied the biggest girl in
her form.</p>

<p>‘Green garters,’ she said.</p>

<p>Mr Marble roared with laughter, only the tiniest bit
forced.</p>

<p>‘You’ll have a lot more than that,’ he laughed. ‘We’ll
be buying you a new outfit altogether this week, lock,
stock, and barrel. What do you say to going away to a
nice school, a real young ladies’ school, where as likely
as not you’ll ride a horse in the mornings, and have all
the things you fancy, and be friends with lords’
daughters?’</p>

<p>‘Ooh, I should like that,’ said Winnie, but it was only
modified rapture. Mr Marble had sprung his little surprise
too surprisingly to have the effect he desired. But
he was satisfied for the moment.</p>

<p>‘But is this all true?’ asked Winnie. ‘Are we really all
going to have just what we like?’</p>

<p>‘As true as true. We can have just whatever we like,’
said Mr Marble, overjoyed to find Winnie, at least,
impressed.</p>

<p>‘Well, what’s mummie going to have?’ continued
Winnie.</p>

<p>Mr Marble turned to his wife, who had sat behind
his shoulder, suddenly, when she heard this surprising
conversation begin. Mr Marble looked at his wife, and
she began to think, confusedly, as always.</p>

<p>‘Anything I want at all?’ she asked, more to gain time
than from any other motive.</p>

<p>‘Anything you want at all,’ repeated Mr Marble.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble let her mind travel free, without hindrance
from the strait limits of expense which had hedged it in
all her life. And her thoughts flew straight, as they often
did, to green fields and the sunlight in the hedgerows.
With the clearness of mental vision so often granted to
those of stumbling intellect a picture rose before her
mind’s eye of a sunny, hyacinth-scented lawn, full of the
murmuring of bees, sleepy little hills, half-wooded, in
the distance, and Mr Marble beside her, kind and a little
attentive and loverlike.</p>

<p>‘Oh, do be quick, mummie,’ said Winnie.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble translated her thoughts to the best of her
ability.</p>

<p>‘I want a new house and a nice garden,’ said Mrs
Marble.</p>

<p>Mr Marble made no comment. He was so silent that
in time they all turned and looked at him. He had
shrunk back in his chair, literally shrunk, so that he
only seemed to be half the bulk he had been when he
came in. His face was blank, and his lips moved without
uttering a sound. He rallied in the end.</p>

<p>‘You won’t have that,’ he said. ‘You’ll never have
that.’</p>

<p>Then he guessed at the strangeness of his manner from
their surprised expressions, and tried to mask it.</p>

<p>‘Houses are hard to get these days,’ he said. ‘And I’m
sure I’m fond enough of the old house not to want to
leave it. Can’t you think of something else, Mother?’</p>

<p>Of course Mother could, if Will wanted her to. Discussion
began in a more animated form, as they warmed
to the subject.</p>

<p>Even John was in the end lured into joining in.
Suggestions were bandied back and forth—furniture for
the house, motor-cars, theatres, chicken for dinner on
Sundays. But somehow they all avoided the crying need
the house was in for redecoration, and none of them
suggested obtaining the assistance of a jobbing gardener
to put some beauty into the backyard. Three of those
present didn’t know why. It was instinctive.</p>

<p>As Mr Marble recovered his good spirits, he became
more jovial and friendly than the children could remember
his being for years. They chuckled when he
produced a big notebook and made a show of noting
down all the suggestions offered.</p>

<p>‘But your tea’s getting cold, Will,’ said Mrs Marble.
‘Why don’t you have it now and go on with the game
after?’</p>

<p>The children looked anxiously at their father. Was it
after all just a game? It would be too bad if it were.
But he reassured them at once.</p>

<p>‘It isn’t a game, mother,’ he said, ‘it isn’t, really.’</p>

<p>But still Mrs Marble looked her unbelief. Half buried
in her tangled memory there were one or two recollections
of times when her husband had cruelly taken
advantage of her dimness of thought. And she was sensitive
about it, and shrank from having it exposed once
more.</p>

<p>‘It isn’t a game, mother,’ said John and Winnie, encouraged.</p>

<p>‘I’ve just made a pot of money in the City,’ said Mr
Marble.</p>

<p>‘Father’s just made a pot of money in the City,’
repeated Winnie.</p>

<p>Gradually she came to believe them.</p>

<p>‘How much?’ she asked, astonishingly more practical
than her children.</p>

<p>‘More than you could guess,’ said Mr Marble, adhering
firmly to his article of faith that under no conditions
should one’s wife know anything about one’s income—although
this had once before brought him to the verge
of ruin. ‘Enough to keep us all our lives,’ added Mr
Marble, rubbing it in.</p>

<p>‘But you’re not—you’re not going to give up the
Bank?’ said Mrs Marble, aghast. You could feel that
capital letter as she spoke. Awe for the vast institution
which gave them their daily bread, and terror of the
Damocles’ sword of dismissal which dangled always over
their heads were ingrained into her being from the early
days of marriage.</p>

<p>‘I don’t know yet,’ said Mr Marble easily. ‘I may and
I may not.’</p>

<p>‘Oh, Will, you mustn’t, you mustn’t really. Supposing
anything went wrong.’</p>

<p>‘Wrong? What’s going to go wrong?’ Marble could not
keep a suspicion of a sneer out of his voice. He was
nettled at the suggestion that anything should ‘go
wrong’ with financial affairs under his control, after his
astonishing feat of manipulation of the franc. He did not
make full allowance for the fact that Mrs Marble knew
nothing of this. That was perhaps characteristic, and
equally so was his annoyance that she should interfere
in the slightest with his control of their joint lives.</p>

<p>‘I don’t know, but—oh, Will, you can’t have made as
much money as all that?’</p>

<p>‘Can’t I! I have.’</p>

<p>To children it seems perfectly natural that their father
should come home one day and say that he has made
all their fortunes; but to a woman nothing seems more
unlikely than that the husband should say the same
thing. It took a long time to convince Mrs Marble.
Indeed, by the time that this was done, Mr Marble had
lost all enjoyment. Nobody had been very enthusiastic;
nobody had told Mr Marble what a very wonderful man
he was; John, indeed, had seemed positively sorry that
it had happened. And Mrs Marble had said the deplorably
wrong thing—as of course was only to be expected.
Poor Marble’s long-stretched nerves gave way,
and he ended by losing his temper rather badly.</p>

<p>‘You’re a lot of fools,’ he snapped. ‘As for you, Annie——’</p>

<p>Annie wept, and as always when that happened Mr
Marble could bear things no longer. He uttered an inarticulate
noise which only inadequately conveyed his
disgust, and rose indignantly from his chair. Then he
went through a series of actions which Annie and the
children had come to know all too well. He roamed
round the room and picked up a couple of the eternal
books on crime that lay about; then he felt in his pocket
for the sideboard key; he brought from the sideboard the
decanter, the siphon, and the glass; and then with his
arms full he passed out of the room. The children and
their mother heard him go into the drawing-room at the
back, and they heard the door shut with unnecessary
violence.</p>

<p>‘Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear,’ wailed Mrs Marble, handkerchief
to her eyes. Then she rallied. It was still an
article of faith with the Marble family that the head of
the house did not drink, never had drunk, and a thousand
times never had been the worse for drink. And at
the same time another article of faith had grown up
lately. That was that Mr Marble did not sit all those
hours in the drawing-room for any particular purpose.
It was just a little whim of his, unaccountable, but not
to be commented upon.</p>

<p>‘Now, children,’ said Mrs Marble, determined at all
costs—although she did not know why—to enforce these
beliefs, and at the same time to hold up the prestige of
her husband, ‘get on quietly with your homework and
don’t make a noise to disturb father. Perhaps he’ll tell
us more about it when he’s not so tired.’</p>

<p>She rose from the table and gathered up the tray on
which still lay her husband’s untasted tea. She went out
quietly, tiptoeing past the drawing-room door. A good
part of the evening she spent in washing up. The rest
she spent in ironing.</p>

<p>When at last she had done her work, and had seen
the children off to bed she came and sat down quietly
in the deserted dining-room. She was very tired, and she
was very worried. Of course, she believed dear Will when
he said he had made all that money, but still—he might
have made a mistake somewhere, and it might not be
as he thought. She felt very frightened about his obvious
determination to leave the Bank. Not for all the wealth
Will said he had made would she admit to herself that
the main cause of her worry was the haunting suspicion
that perhaps Will had made this money illegally. He
might be taken away and put in prison. That would be
terrible, but, of course, she would always love him and
be true to him. Indeed, Mrs Marble, thinking in muddled
fashion but doggedly as was her wont, decided that something
like this must have happened. He had not really
done anything wicked of course, but there would be suspicions
against him, and all the evidence would point
that way, and so on. His recent anxiety, which even Mrs
Marble had guessed at, and his mutterings at night as
he lay at her side all seemed to prove the same thing.
Poor boy, he must be very worried. And the thought of
him sitting there all alone in the half-dark drawing-room
moved her to vast pity. All her queer love for him rose
in her breast and she felt her eyes growing moist. She
loved him very, very dearly. It was because of this anxiety
of his that he had not been as tender towards her as
he had once been. But that would end now, now that
he knew that she was on his side and shared his trouble.
There was nothing in the world so dear to Mrs Marble
as the kisses of that little, shabby man with the reddish
moustache, who bore the fires of hell eternally in his
bosom. With her love welling up in her breast until it
began even to oppress her, so that she had to rest her
hand over her heart, Mrs Marble came to the cross-roads
of her life—and did not even know that she had reached
them. Without further thought she went out of the room,
and quietly across into the other, bearing love and hope
to her darling husband.</p>

<p>He was sitting in the position that had become habitual,
in the uncomfortable late Victorian armchair, facing
the window and about two yards from it. His position
indicated an awkward compromise between tension and
relaxation. On the chair beside him stood his whisky and
his glass, and on his lap lay his book, as if he had interrupted
his reading for a moment to follow some train
of thought which had just occurred to him. But for
the last hour nearly, it had been too dark to read. Mr
Marble was half drunk, and his mind was working out
possibilities of unimaginable horror, as he gazed out
into the nearly dark garden which held his secret.</p>

<p>‘Dear,’ began Mrs Marble, and then, as he did not
answer: ‘Are you awake, dear?’</p>

<p>She came nearer to him, walking like a grey ghost in
the semi-darkness, and touched him lightly on the
shoulder. Mr Marble sprang into instant activity. He
writhed in his chair, and the whisky decanter went over
with a crash, sending its scant contents gurgling out on
to the carpet.</p>

<p>‘What—what——’ he spluttered. After all, a man can
be ready for all emergencies only for a limited time, and
Mr Marble had relaxed for once. Then he saw that it
was only his wife. ‘Oh, it’s you, you fool,’ he snarled,
ashamed of his absurd fear—he would not admit to
himself what he had been afraid of—and angry with her,
with himself, and with everything else.</p>

<p>‘Oh Will, I’m so sorry,’ said Mrs Marble, stooping
to pick up the decanter, her slippers sopping with
whisky.</p>

<p>A bare half-inch remained in the decanter—mere
mockery. Mr Marble peered at it, and swore. It was an
ugly word he used, and Mrs Marble drew her breath
in sharply. But she still tried to make the peace.</p>

<p>‘Never mind, Willie boy,’ she said, ‘I couldn’t help
it. Your can get some more in the morning. Never mind,
dear.’</p>

<p>They were the little pathetic words she used to use
when John was a little boy, very near to her heart, and
something had upset him. To Mrs Marble’s mind the loss
of his whisky must affect Mr Marble in the same way as
did a broken toy affect Baby John.</p>

<p>‘Never mind, dear,’ said Mrs Marble, and she put out
her hand to his forehead, just as she used to do.</p>

<p>But Mr Marble only pushed her away pettishly, and
growled out the ugly word he had used before. It was
that that upset Mrs Marble. She was used to his fits of
temper—she would not have loved him so dearly had
he not had them, baby like—but he had never sworn at
her, never before. Still she made another effort, trying
to get past his outstretched arm to touch his forehead
and ruffle back the sparse hair in the way she loved
doing.</p>

<p>‘That wasn’t what I wanted to speak about, dear,’ she
said. ‘I wanted——’</p>

<p>‘I hope to God it wasn’t,’ sneered Marble. ‘You would
be a bigger fool than even I thought you were if you came
in here just to upset my whisky.’</p>

<p>‘Oh, Willie, Willie,’ sobbed Mrs Marble. She was crying
now.</p>

<p>‘Oh, Willie, Willie,’ mocked Mr Marble, his nerves
fretted red raw.</p>

<p>‘No, Willie, <span class='it'>do</span> listen. I wanted to tell you that I know
about it, after all, and it doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter
a bit, dear. It won’t alter me at all.’</p>

<p>She was able to say this long speech—long for her,
that is—only through the inability of her husband to say
or do anything. He had gripped the arms of the chair
and was staring at her in terror. Then at last he spoke,
or rather croaked. His throat was dry and his heart was
pounding away in his breast like a steam engine.</p>

<p>‘How—how do you know?’</p>

<p>‘I don’t know really, dear, I just guessed. But you don’t
understand, dear. It doesn’t matter, that’s what I wanted
to say.’</p>

<p>Marble laughed; it sounded horrible in the darkness.</p>

<p>‘So you think it doesn’t matter? A lot you know.’</p>

<p>‘No, dear, I don’t mean that. I mean it doesn’t matter
my knowing. Oh, Willie dear——’</p>

<p>But Marble was laughing again. It was a wild beast
sound.</p>

<p>‘If <span class='it'>you</span> could guess, half the world will guess to-morrow.
Ah——’</p>

<p>‘To-morrow? Don’t they know now?’</p>

<p>‘Would I be here if they did, you fool?’</p>

<p>‘No, dear. But I thought perhaps they suspected.’</p>

<p>‘There’s nothing for them to suspect. They can only
know.’</p>

<p>‘But how can they know?’</p>

<p>‘If young Medland——’</p>

<p>‘Medland? Oh, you mean that young nephew who
came here. Did he help you? I’ve often wanted to ask
you about him.’</p>

<p>Marble stared at her grey form in the twilight. He
could not see her face, and he felt a horrid fear that
either she was tempting him or else he had lost his
unassailable position for a silly nothing. For a moment
the first idea triumphed.</p>

<p>‘You devil,’ he said. ‘What are you doing? What are
you asking me this for?’</p>

<p>His voice cracked with fear and passion. Mrs Marble
said nothing. She was too startled to utter a word. Mr
Marble stared at her unmoving figure, and for a moment
a wild, ridiculous fear of the unknown overwhelmed him.
Was it really his wife, or was it—was it—? Blind panic
began to overmaster him. He struck out wildly at the
brooding form. He felt a savage pleasure as his fist
struck firm flesh, and he heard his wife give a
startled cry. He struck again and again, heaving himself
up out of his chair to do so. The little chair fell over,
and the glass and the siphon broke into a thousand
clattering fragments. His wife screamed faintly as he followed
her across the room, hitting with puny savagery.</p>

<p>‘Oh, Willie, Willie, don’t!’</p>

<p>Then chance directed a blow more accurately and Mrs
Marble fell dumbly to the ground.</p>

<p>Marble staggered, and clutched the back of a chair to
steady himself. As his panic passed, he was only conscious
of a dreadful weakness; and he could hardly stand, and
he was dizzy with strain and with the pounding of his
heart. There came a clattering outside the room, and
then the door was flung open. The light from the hall
lamp outside streamed in, revealing John standing by
the door in his ragged nightclothes. His mother lay where
she had fallen, close at his feet.</p>

<p>For a second father and son stared at each other. It
was only for a second, but that was enough. At the end
of it John knew that he hated his father; and his father
knew that he hated his son. John opened his mouth to
speak, but no words came. Then his mother at his feet
sighed and stirred. Mr Marble recovered himself with an
effort—oh, those efforts!</p>

<p>‘Glad you came down, John,’ he said. ‘Your mother’s
had a—bit of an accident. Help me upstairs with her.’</p>

<p>John said nothing, but he bent and put his arm under
her shoulders, while Marble held her at her knees. Between
them they dragged her upstairs. She was conscious
and well enough to walk up herself by that time, but a
frozen silence lay on all three of them, and none of them
would break it. They laid her on the bed, and Mrs
Marble wailed and dabbed at her eyes with her handkerchief
which she still held clutched in her hand. John
looked once more at his father, with a flash of hatred
still in his eyes, and then he swung round and walked
out of the room.</p>

<p>Perhaps even then all might have been well if Mr
Marble had bent over his wife and had asked her pardon,
in the little soft voice that he had sometimes used, which
Annie loved so well. Annie might have softened; with
her arms about his neck she might have pulled him down
to her, and her broken-hearted tears might have changed
to tears of joy even at that late moment. But Mr Marble
did not do this. He was badly flustered and shaken; he
stepped back from the bed and fidgeted round the room.
When at last he came back to her Annie had her face
buried in the pillow, and she shook off the hand he tentatively
rested on her shoulder. Mr Marble dallied for
a moment, but before his mind’s eye rose a vision of a
little drain of whisky left in the decanter downstairs.
There was still a little left; he had seen it with his own
eyes after Annie had picked up the decanter from where
she had knocked it. And whisky at that moment was what
Marble needed more than anything else in the world. He
turned and tiptoed out of the room, downstairs to where
the decanter was.</p>

<p>Late that night Mr Marble still sat in the drawing-room;
he had lighted the gas, because he did not like
the darkness he had found down there. His hand gripped
an empty glass, and his eyes stared across the room as he
sat in the armchair, faintly visualizing the sequence of
events his over-active mind was tracing out. Too little
whisky and too much excitement had stimulated Mr
Marble’s brain to such an extent that he could not check
his wild imagination at all. The consequences of the
evening’s work were presented to him in every possible
variation. At one second he seemed to feel the hands of
the police on his shoulders; the next, and he could feel
the hangman’s slimy fingers upon him as they writhed
over him making all ready. More than once he started
from his chair mouthing a stream of inarticulate entreaties.
Each time he sank back with a sigh, only to be
plunged immediately afterwards into some other horrible
fantasy. He had cut the ground from under his feet; he
had made the blunder that every murderer had to make.
His secret was shared, and a secret shared was a secret
divulged. That fool Annie would never bear the strain
he felt so hard. She would let fall something and then—the
ghastly fancies recommenced. What Mr Marble
needed was whisky, quantities of it, so that he could
drown all these maddening thoughts. But whisky was
just what Mr Marble could not have. Not all his twenty-seven
thousand pounds, no, not all the wealth imaginable
could buy whisky for Mr Marble at that time. In
London it might have done, but not in that quiet suburb,
at one o’clock in the morning. Mr Marble could only sit
yammering in his chair, tormented to madness.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER VII</span></h1></div>

<p>Mr Marble was, of course, deceiving himself when he
imagined that his wife could deduce all that had happened
from his half-hearted exclamations that night. He
realized this as time passed. She could do nothing of the
sort. The situation between them was still strained; they
said as little to each other as they could help, but it was
not because Annie knew her husband for a murderer.
Mr Marble gradually regained his peace of mind in that
respect.</p>

<p>And other things were too exciting for him to brood
over it just at present. As he had expected, Mr Saunders
had been unable to keep to himself the glorious fact that
he had brought off a hundred to one success and had
acquired the highly respectable sum of twenty-four thousand
pounds. In two days the news was all over the City,
and in three it had been brought to the official notice
of the Bank. There had been a slight scene, in which Mr
Marble bore himself with the arrogance only to be expected
of a man with a fortune at his back. The Bank
suspected the worst; told him more in sorrow than in
anger that they would not prosecute this time—they had
had no case anyway, and furthermore they would not
expose their office routine to comment in a court of law—and
then accepted the resignation that he tendered
with a sigh of relief.</p>

<p>Yet Mr Marble did not become at once a gentleman
of leisure. A distinguished firm of foreign exchange
brokers heard Saunders’ story and decided that a man of
Mr Marble’s talents would be a desirable acquisition.
The only man in all the City who had foreseen the rise
of the franc, who had had the courage of his convictions
to put all his savings into the speculation, and who, besides,
had the force of character to inveigle Saunders into
supporting him would be a man worth having. So they
approached Mr Marble, and made him a tentative offer
which with little debate—he already had a vague idea
that the more his thoughts were occupied the better—he
accepted. The hours were easy; the junior partner was
a little hesitant in mentioning the amount of the salary—five
hundred a year. So Mr Marble found himself in a
comfortable position with no less an income than seventeen
hundred pounds a year. He struggled hard to stop
himself from thinking about the fact that all this splendour
was entirely due to the fierce stimulus of being in
danger of the gallows.</p>

<p>The freehold of 53 Malcolm Road was safely purchased.
It was only a matter of three days’ negotiations,
for the owners were overjoyed to find someone willing to
pay seven hundred pounds for a house which cost twenty
pounds a year in repairs and yet was not allowed by law
to be rented at a greater sum than thirty-five pounds.</p>

<p>Mr Marble could afford to live in a house three times
as expensive. But he could not bring himself to leave the
place. He could not bear the idea of taking his eyes from
that garden. Besides, he had a vague apprehension that
there might be legislation compelling all owners of unoccupied
houses to let them, and then the state of affairs
which his tortured imagination so constantly pictured
would naturally develop. No, he could not bear to leave
the place, and so Mr Marble, with an income of seventeen
hundred a year, continued to live in a shabby street,
in a house with two tiny sitting-rooms, three tiny bedrooms,
and a kitchen whose size Mrs Marble deplored
every time she entered it.</p>

<p>Poor Annie Marble! She could hardly realize all the
changes that would take place. The first convincing
proof that matters were radically different occurred in a
week or two after that unpleasant evening in the
drawing-room. Mr Marble was leaving for town—he did
not have to start until past nine o’clock nowadays—and
as he said good-bye at the door he reached into his pocket
and thrust something roughly into her hand.</p>

<p>‘Here,’ he said, ‘take this and go out this morning and
spend it, every bit of it. Mind you spent it all. There,
good-bye.’</p>

<p>He dashed off up the road. Mrs Marble looked wonderingly
at what he had given her. It was a roll of notes,
crisp and fresh from the Bank. She passed them through
her fingers. Some were five-pound notes, and some were
one-pound notes. Altogether they amounted to an
enormous sum—fifty pounds in all, actually—and it was
more money than she had ever seen together at one time.
Mr Marble, in the bus on the way to the station, felt
a good deal more comfortable than he had done for the
last two weeks. It had been rotten, not daring to meet
his wife’s eyes. She had a thin time, poor thing, and Mr
Marble knew from experience that one of the few slight
pleasures in her life was being able to spend money.
With fifty pounds in her purse she would be able to go
down Rye Lane and have a high old time. Perhaps when
he came back that evening she would be smiling again
and all that beastly business when he had lost control
of himself would be forgotten.</p>

<p>But even while he was thinking this Mrs Marble was
turning those notes over with fear in her heart. At that
time her husband would have given her more pleasure
by an unexpected gift of five shillings. For five shillings
does not set one thinking of police and prisons. Besides,
Mrs Marble hardly knew what to do with fifty pounds,
and lastly she had too great a fear for the future to
spend it all at once. Muddle-headed she may have been,
but in her life Mrs Marble had learned one lesson, and
that very thoroughly; it was to the effect that there is
nothing as nice as money, nothing that goes so quickly,
and nothing that is so hard to obtain. Mrs Marble went
and locked it into the one private drawer she had in all
the house.</p>

<p>She went slowly through her morning’s work—she still
had no help—making the beds, turning out one room,
peeling potatoes for the children’s dinner, and then she
put her hat on to do her usual day’s shopping. In the
hall she hesitated for a moment, and then she yielded.
Hurrying upstairs, she unlocked the drawer and guiltily
peeled off one single pound note and thrust it into her
purse.</p>

<p>Mr Marble returned home in time to join his children
at their tea. As he came in he was obviously in good
spirits, and Mrs Marble brightened as she saw that this
all-too-rare mood was on him. Mr Marble looked round
the room inquiringly; he put his head out into the hall
again and peered up and down it. Then with much
elaboration he began to search under the table and in
all sorts of impossible places.</p>

<p>‘What <span class='it'>are</span> you looking for, Will?’ asked Mrs Marble.
She could hardly help laughing at his antics.</p>

<p>‘I’m looking for all the things you bought to-day,’ was
the reply.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble looked guiltily at her husband.</p>

<p>‘With that money you gave me this morning?’ she
asked.</p>

<p>‘That’s right. I gave it to you to spend.’</p>

<p>‘I didn’t like to spend it all, dear. I only used a little
of it.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble took a gold cigarette case out of his pocket,
chose a gold-tipped cigarette, lighted it with a match
from a gold matchbox, and looked across at her with
half-concealed amusement.</p>

<p>‘Well, what <span class='it'>did</span> you buy, then? Come on, let’s hear all
about it.’</p>

<p>Mrs Marble fumbled nervously with her dress.</p>

<p>‘I—I bought one or two little things for the
kitchen——’</p>

<p>‘What were they?’</p>

<p>‘A—a mop, dear, and two new pie-dishes——’</p>

<p>Mr Marble yelled with laughter.</p>

<p>‘Splendid!’ he said. ‘And what else?’</p>

<p>‘A new china pot for the aspidistra, such a nice one,
dear, but, of course, they’re sending that. And a wing
for my other hat, the black one, you know. And—and—I
don’t think there’s anything else. Oh, don’t laugh like
that. I couldn’t help it.’</p>

<p>But Mr Marble only laughed the more. He rocked with
merriment.</p>

<p>He turned to the children, and gasped out between
his outbursts, ‘I give your mother fifty pounds to go out
and spend, and that’s what she does with it! A mop and
some pie-dishes! Oh, Annie, you’ll be the death of me
one of these days.’</p>

<p>Even the children realized that it was vague bad taste
on his part to hold their mother up to ridicule before
them, and poor Mrs Marble grew more and more
flustered.</p>

<p>‘Oh, don’t laugh, Will, don’t. How was I to know that
you really wanted me to spend all that?’</p>

<p>But Mr Marble did not continue the argument.</p>

<p>‘To-morrow’s Saturday,’ he said, ‘and I’m not going to
the office. We’ll go out together and then I’ll show you
how to spend the money I give you. What about it?’</p>

<p>‘Oh, that would be nice, dear.’</p>

<p>Little Mrs Marble was happily flustered now. It was
perhaps a year since she had been out with her husband;
it was probably three since she had been north of the
Thames with him.</p>

<p>And yet that morning to which she looked forward
so happily through the night was not wholly successful.
It was rather like a wild nightmare. They began in
Tottenham Court Road at ten o’clock in the morning.
Mr Marble began by making arrangements for having
’some old furniture’ removed from 53 Malcolm Road.
Then he began an orgy of buying. Clearly he was acting
on some already-matured plan of his own, for he went
straight to the ‘period rooms’ to make his purchases. But
he did not want modest Queen Anne or beautiful Chippendale.
That sort of thing was not in his line. Instead,
he demanded Empire furniture. They gave it to him. In
addition they gave him furniture of the period following
close after the Empire, massively gilt, and showing evident
traces of the debasement of taste that flooded the
world from the forties onward. He bought over-gilded,
over-florid chairs and couches. He bought an unsightly
Empire bed ornamented with gilt Cupids in hideous
taste. His crowning purchase was a massive table, the
frame carved and chased and tortured into a monstrosity
of design and then flamingly gilded; the body of the
table was of marble mosaic, crudely arranged in feeble
classical design. That table probably weighed between
nine and ten hundredweight, and it looked like it.</p>

<p>The manager of the department rubbed his hands as
the bargain was concluded. He could not remember a
morning like this since the palmy days of the war. He
foisted a few more white elephants on to Mr Marble,
and then led them off in the direction of pictures and
picture-frames. And yet that manager did not feel altogether
happy while making these arrangements. The
business was too simple. It was too like taking advantage
of the feeble-minded. He had only to offer the thing,
name its price, and book the order. Even he, skilled as
he was in the mentality of the furniture-buyer, did not
appreciate the fact that Mr Marble was buying what he
wanted to buy, not what the manager wanted him to
buy. Mr Marble was thoroughly enjoying himself. Those
vast expanses of gilt, those florid designs like nightmare
Laocoöns, were to Mr Marble’s mind the perfection of
good taste. As for the mosaic table, he considered himself
lucky to have got hold of that.</p>

<p>So rapidly did Mr Marble make his purchases, and so
little did he confer with his wife, that in two hours the
whole business was completed. Mr Marble signed a
cheque that gave him possession of enough debased
Empire furniture to fill 53 Malcolm Road to overflowing,
and was bowed out of the shop by an amazed and delighted
staff.</p>

<p>On the pavement Mr Marble consulted the gold
octagon-shaped watch on his wrist and hailed a taxicab.</p>

<p>‘Oh, Will,’ murmured Mrs Marble in deprecating
tones, but she got in.</p>

<p>‘Bond Street,’ snapped Mr Marble to the driver, and
climbed in beside her.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble clung desperately to her husband’s arm as
they bowled along Oxford Street. She was half afraid lest
he might suddenly disappear, as so frequently happens in
fairy stories, and leave her alone in a taxicab—she had
never been in one before—to find her way home and
face the arrival of a houseful of Empire furniture without
the support of his presence. Mr Marble made no objection
to this public display of affection. He even pressed
the timid arm that lay between his own and his side,
thereby sending Mrs Marble into the seventh heaven of
delight. She was vaguely reminded of their honeymoon.</p>

<p>They got down at Bond Street tube station, and began
to walk slowly down, their eyes on the shop windows.
Mrs Marble began to wonder what was going to happen
next. She soon found out.</p>

<p>‘Go in there,’ said Mr Marble, stopping outside a shop.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble glanced at the windows. The one or two
articles displayed there proved without a doubt that it
was a shop for women, and also that it was a shop for
women with plenty of money. She clung to her husband’s
arm more wildly than ever.</p>

<p>‘Oh, I can’t, Will, I can’t. I—I don’t like to.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble snorted with contempt.</p>

<p>‘Get along with you,’ he said. ‘Go and buy what you
want. Nine women out of ten would give their ears for
the chance.’</p>

<p>‘Oh, but, Will, I don’t know what I want. Let’s—let’s
go to Selfridge’s or somewhere.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble announced his contempt for Selfridge’s to
all Bond Street.</p>

<p>‘Women never do know what they want when they
go into a shop. You go in. Just leave it to them. They’ll
do all the asking that’s necessary once you get inside and
they find out how much money you’ve got. You got your
fifty all right?’</p>

<p>‘Yes, dear.’ Mrs Marble was sure of that. She had been
clutching her handbag all the morning in terror lest she
should lose it.</p>

<p>‘Right. Here’s another twenty. Put it away. Now in
you go.’</p>

<p>Mrs Marble, in the grip of a blind terror that made
her knees tremble, tottered into the shop. Mr Marble
wandered thirstily away in search of a drink.</p>

<p>When he returned his wife was still inside, and he had
to wait dismally for some time before she emerged, pale
but firm, and with a strange joy at her heart. She could
tell him little of what had happened—Mrs Marble was
not clever at describing experiences—and it was hopeless
for her to endeavour to enlighten him about the feeling
of hopeless inferiority that she had felt when she saw
the look on the assistant’s face when she had to confess
miserably to an address in the unenlightened suburbs
south of the river, and of the condescension of the whole
staff towards her, and of the unmoved fashion in which
they had kindly relieved her of all her money and further
allowed her to order a great deal more than she had
been able to pay for. And how she had realized as soon
as she was inside the door that her clothes were dowdy
and that her hat, even with the new wing that she had
bought the day before, was not, in the eyes of those
aristocratic assistants, a hat at all. In fact, none of her
clothes were even clothes in their eyes. She had realized
in a blinding flash that these people mentally divided
the world into the clothed and the unclothed, and to
them she was on no higher plane than a naked savage.
But she had made up for it.</p>

<p>‘I’m afraid I’ve spent an awful lot of money, Will,’ she
said apologetically.</p>

<p>‘Quite right, too,’ said Mr Marble. ‘They’re sending
the things, I suppose? Sure you gave ’em the right
address? That’s all right, then. Let’s go home.’</p>

<p>And home they went, in a bus crowded with the Saturday
morning rush, back to Malcolm Road. It was rather
unfortunate that when they arrived there, at two o’clock,
there was nothing ready for them to eat, and Mr Marble
had to wait while his wife, with her brain swimming in
a delirium of chiffons and serges, prepared a hurried and
indigestive meal. The best thing they could have done
was to have had their lunch out, but Mr Marble had
hardly thought of that. His old obsession had gripped
him again; he was moody while on the bus, without a
word to spare for his wife; he had been very anxious to
get home to see that no one was interfering with that
precious garden of his. This panic fear was displaying a
growing habit of suddenly developing.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER VIII</span></h1></div>

<p>Next week kept all Malcolm Road on tiptoe. Various
rumours had been flying round about Mr Marble’s suddenly
acquired wealth, stating its amount and its manner
of coming in twenty different ways. Yet there were still
some sceptics, who refused to believe the evidence presented
to them, and who scornfully declared that they
would give credit to the rumours only when they were
proved beyond all doubt. Why, only a few months back
there had been similar rumours, when the Marbles
started to pay off their bills and Mrs Marble had bought
some new clothes. But in a short time they had been
back to their old tricks again, owing money on all sides,
while Mrs Marble had been going about as dowdy as
any of them.</p>

<p>But this time the sceptics were confounded. At first the
news had flown from lip to lip—‘Number 53’s moving
out’. It looked like it, indeed. An empty furniture van
stood outside, and men were moving furniture into it
from Number 53. Everywhere, from upper windows behind
curtains, housewives were watching the process.
Some, overwhelmed with curiosity, put on their hats and
went thither on hurriedly-composed errands of borrowing
or restoring in order to have a word with Mrs Marble
to find out what was really going on. But they retired
baffled. Mrs Marble was in too great a state of hurry and
bewilderment to give them any satisfaction at all. And,
having retired, they were doomed to further mystification.
For more vans drew up outside Number 53, and from
these men began to bring other furniture and take it
inside.</p>

<p>Truly the neighbours were baffled. They had heard
of people moving out before, and they had heard of
people moving in. They knew of many cases where these
two operations had been carried out as nearly simultaneously
as might be. They had also heard, but more
rarely, of people buying new furniture although they
were not newly married. But the present process utterly
confounded them. And the furniture that was arriving!
Nothing half as splendid had ever been seen before in
Malcolm Road. They saw the great Empire bed being
carried in in sections, the gilding flaming in the daylight,
and the Cupids, vapidly chubby, clustered upon it. The
neighbours shook their heads sadly, and told each other
that they thought that that bed could tell a tale or two
if it wished. Then came chairs, and dressing-tables, and
chests of drawers, all resplendent in gold, and covered
thick with carving. There was little housework done in
Malcolm Road that day. The housewives were too
busy watching the new furniture being brought in to
Number 53.</p>

<p>The work was still uncompleted late in the afternoon
when Mr Marble returned from the office. It was nearly
done, but the task that remained was the hardest of all.
The men were busy arranging to get the vast mosaic
table into the house. Mr Marble, with quite a pleasant
bubble of excitement within him, flung down his hat
and hastened out to superintend the handling of this,
his chiefest treasure. He stood by the gate, hatless in
the sunshine, giving useless and unheeded advice while
the workmen toiled and sweated, handling the monstrosity.
Mrs Marble had sunk down on one of the
uncomfortable gilt chairs, quite tired out.</p>

<p>As Mr Marble stood on the pavement by his gate he
felt a touch on his arm, and he looked round. She was
a woman nearly of middle-age—no, hardly that, thought
Mr Marble, but at any rate she gave an impression of ripe
and luscious maturity. And she was dressed—oh, simply
to perfection. She was dressed as Mr Marble sometimes
vaguely wished his wife would dress. Despite her closely-fitting
hat anyone could tell that she was auburn-haired,
and her eyes were a rich brown and her complexion was
splendid. She wore her clothes in a fashion only achieved
by her countrywomen—she was French. The whole
atmosphere her appearance conveyed was one of ripeness
and perfection—over-ripeness, perhaps, but that was, if
anything, an added attraction in Mr Marble’s eyes.</p>

<p>‘What lovely things you have got,’ said this apparition.
‘I have been looking at them for ever so long. Those
beautiful chairs and that lovely bed! They remind me
of what I have seen in the Louvre.’</p>

<p>Mr Marble was a little taken aback. He was unused to
being addressed in the broad light of day by over-ripe
and entirely delectable goddesses. But he was secretly
pleased. It was a pleasant thing to have this long-coveted
Empire furniture admired, especially by
people of obvious good taste like this one. Mr Marble
realized that the difficulty that the newcomer displayed
in tackling the aspirate was not the one usually
met with in Malcolm Road. He noted her as French,
with a pleased appreciation of his own perspicacity, and
his head positively swam as he looked at her and strove
to make some reply. The unknown noted his embarrassment,
was pleased, and went swiftly on as though she
had not.</p>

<p>‘You do not mind my looking at your nice things?
No? I am very rude, I know, and I should not, but I
could not help it. And now I have confessed, and I
ought to have pardon. You do pardon me, eh?’</p>

<p>Mr Marble had not even yet recovered himself, and
this charming little speech did nothing to assist in the
process. He stammered out some banal phrase or other—the
only intelligible word was ‘charmed’—but somehow
the newcomer soon put him at his ease and they were
chatting away as though they had been friends for years.
She greeted the appearance of the mosaic table with
little shrieks of delight.</p>

<p>‘Oh, how lovely!’ she said. ‘It is magnificent. You are
a very lucky man, Mr——?’</p>

<p>‘Marble,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>Upstairs, three doors off, one woman said to another:</p>

<p>‘The French dressmaker woman, you know, Madame
Collins, she calls herself, has just got off with Mr Marble.
Nice goings on, I call it, right in the street outside his
front door, with beds and I-don’t-know-what being carried
past them. I wonder what Mrs Marble will have to
say about <span class='it'>that</span>.’</p>

<p>‘Nothing, I don’t expect. She doesn’t never have a
word to say for herself. He treats her cruel, so I’ve heard.’</p>

<p>But Mr Marble for the moment cared nothing for
tittle-tattling neighbours. He was too busy thinking of
something nice to say to this wonderful woman. He was
still talking to her when the table had at last been
manœuvred through the narrow hall door and the workmen
were gathering in the background with a furtive
lust for tips in their eyes. He paid them testily, and signed
the forms they held out to him without even glancing
over them. He did not want her to go away just yet, but
for the life of him he did not see how he could possibly
detain her. Then came his wife, and this, instead of
spoiling everything, as he had feared, was the saving of
the situation. He was not to know that Madame Collins’
dearest wish at the moment was to scrape acquaintance
with such obviously well-to-do people. She had noted the
furniture, and she had noted Mr Marble’s well-cut
clothes, just obtained from the best tailor in the City,
and his platinum wrist-watch bracelet and his gold
cigarette case. They would be acquaintances worth having,
she had decided. When Mrs Marble appeared she
went effusively towards her.</p>

<p>‘Oh, Mrs Marble,’ she said, ‘I ’ave just been talking to
your ’usband about all your nice furniture. It is too
lovely. You are a lucky woman to ’ave such nice things.’</p>

<p>Mrs Marble was as startled as her husband had been
ten minutes ago. She glanced quaveringly at him, and
took from him her cue of agreeableness.</p>

<p>‘I’m glad you like them,’ she said.</p>

<p>Mr Marble took his chance.</p>

<p>‘Won’t you come in?’ he said. ‘Then you could see
them in the rooms. My wife could give you a cup of tea,
too.’</p>

<p>‘Thank you so much,’ said Madame Collins, and she
passed the threshold, in more senses than one. They
passed into the dining-room. It was crammed unbearably
with gilt chairs and the abominable mosaic table, whose
tawdriness was accentuated by the faded flowered wallpaper
and what was left of the dingy old furniture. With
its glitter and glare the room looked like a cheap-jack
jeweller’s stall. Madame Collins looked grimly round,
but she was very charming about it, and praised the effect
so delicately that even pale little Mrs Marble flushed with
pleasure. And she introduced herself in such a ladylike
fashion that everybody felt happy instead of uncomfortable
as they expected to feel.</p>

<p>They had tea with the silver tea-set on the gilt and
mosaic table—a combination that annoyed Madame
Collins’ really sensitive eye extremely—and when she
rose to take her leave Mrs Marble was almost sorry, tired
though she was, and she eagerly accepted Madame Collins’
invitation to call whenever she felt like it.</p>

<p>Madame Collins had been very tactful and had let
them know all about her past and present circumstances,
without being too obvious about it. They had gathered
that she was French, of a very old and distinguished
family ruined by the war—her father was actually a
Normandy peasant—and she had married an English
officer of vast talent but no money. Now they were
struggling to make both ends meet, she with her dressmaking
and he with his music. She admitted with a shy
laugh that he really tuned pianos, but that was not at
all the work he was fitted for. He had great ideas about
what he could do, and—so she said—she believed in
them, too. To Mrs Marble she conveyed the impression
of a devoted couple with a great future before them; to
Mr Marble it did not seem as if the devotion were so
pronounced. That goes to show what a clever woman
Madame Collins was, even allowing for the fact that Mrs
Marble was very tired, and so preoccupied with being
ladylike and pouring out the tea that she missed the one
or two flashing glances with which Madame Collins
favoured Mr Marble from her warm, brown eyes.</p>

<p>And when she had gone, Mr Marble, with his money
scorching a hole in his pocket, was so excited and pleased
with his inner thoughts that for the time he had no
care about anything else. His riotous imagination had,
for the nonce, something to riot over other than the
possibilities of detection, and he made the most of it. He
dreamed away the evening very pleasantly. He was not
even disturbed by the fact that John and Winnie found
it difficult to do homework on the mosaic table in consequence
of the raised gilt border; he had no care for Mrs
Marble, who was patiently clearing up the confusion
left by the men when they had brought the furniture,
and who was toiling putting mattresses and sheets on the
cupid-encumbered Empire bed in the front bedroom.</p>

<p>But he paid for this slight relaxation. He had to pay
for it sooner or later of course, and as it happened this
came about the next evening.</p>

<p>Mr Marble was sitting smoking in the glittering
dining-room. He was still happy and peaceful; he ignored
the discomfort of the Empire armchair in which he sat;
in the hall stood a crate of books he had ordered that
morning—crime books, mystery books, all the books he
had seen advertised at the back of the limited selection
available at the Public Library, and had coveted during
his poverty—and when he felt like it he would leisurely
unpack them and would arrange them in the drawing-room
so that he could browse in them when he would.
But he was rudely disturbed. Mrs Marble had come into
the room and had sat down, and was fidgeting with her
sewing in a nervous fashion. If Mr Marble had given
the matter a thought he would have known that she was
nerving herself to ask something of him, but he had been
too preoccupied in thinking about Madame Collins and
her brown eyes—the money in his pocket had something
to do with it as well—and the natural result was that her
request took him unawares.</p>

<p>‘Will,’ said Mrs Marble, ‘don’t you think we could
have Mrs Summers back here again now that we can
afford it? This house means a lot of work for me, and
now that we’ve got all this new furniture——’</p>

<p>Mr Marble sat very still. His mind had raced away to
all the books about crimes that he had read. He had
impressed it upon himself so very often that he could
only be found out if he made some stupid mistake, like
the people whose unhappy lives were told in <span class='it'>Historic
Days at the Assizes</span>. He was not going to make any stupid
mistake. Mrs Summers was a harmless soul enough, but
she had the usual besetting sin of charwomen—inquisitiveness.
Goodness knows what she might not find out
for herself. Or perhaps his wife would say something
that would set her tongue wagging in the other houses
in which she worked. It was only to be expected. Mr
Marble did not mind being gossiped about—he rather
liked it, in the ordinary way, in fact. But he would have
no gossip about himself nowadays. He simply could not
afford it. He could foresee with vivid clearness what
would happen. His wife would let fall a careless word
or two, and Mrs Summers would repeat them equally
carelessly but with a lavish percentage of imaginative
detail. The woman who heard her would tell someone
else, and before anyone could say Jack Robinson there
would be all sorts of tales flying round. There was plenty
of gossip about him already, thanks to the new furniture;
any addition might result in disaster—anonymous letters
to the police, or a committee of neighbours coming
secretly to investigate. No one would know, of course,
anything about the real state of affairs, but Mr Marble
did not want there to be any suspicion, however baseless,
attached to him. For his position was not absolutely
secure. If the interest of the police were sufficiently roused
even for them to make a casual inspection of all his
financial arrangements they might easily find something
to interest them regarding certain bank-notes that had
passed into his possession one stormy night last winter.
And it was not mere money that was at stake, nor comfort,
nor even Empire furniture. What was in peril was
his life! Much reading of books about crime had given
him a good idea of the formalities of the condemned cell
and of the scaffold. And he writhed in anguish at the
thought. He could not possibly run any risks. Already in
imagination he was being torn from his bed one bleak
morning, and dragged fainting along a grey corridor
to a tarred shed wherein awaited him a trapdoor and a
noose. There was sweat on his face as he forced this
picture on one side and turned to face his wife.</p>

<p>‘No,’ he said, ‘we don’t want any charwomen in here.
You will have to manage on your own.’</p>

<p>Even Mrs Marble expostulated at this arbitrary decision.</p>

<p>‘But, Will, dear,’ she said, ‘I don’t think you understand.
I’m not asking for anything, I’m not really. You’re
giving me nine pounds a week housekeeping money, and
that’s a lot more than I can spend at all. We could have
a maid to live in with all that money, two maids perhaps,
with caps and aprons and all. But I don’t want that.
They’d be too much trouble. I only want old Mrs Summers
to come in three or four days a week and help me
with the rough work. It’s too much for me, really and
truly it is.’</p>

<p>‘What, in this little house?’</p>

<p>‘Of course I <span class='it'>could</span> do it, if I had to, Will. But it does
seem silly, doesn’t it, that I should have to sweep and
dust and wash up, when there are lots of people who
would be thankful to have the chance to do it for me?
And my back still aches from lifting those mattresses
yesterday.’</p>

<p>‘Nonsense,’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble was incapable of sustaining an argument
for long. She had already made two speeches, each of
them thrice the length of any of her usual remarks, and
she could do no more for the present. She relapsed into
unhappy silence, while Mr Marble battled with the train
of thought that had been raised by his wife’s suggestion.
His imagination tortured him with peculiar malignity
for the next few minutes.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble’s mind was working, too. That day had
seen the arrival of the first of the things she had bought
last Saturday—large boxes delivered by carrier, and full
of the most delectable things her imagination had ever
pictured. She had lingered over them lovingly. There
were hats, wonderful hats, which suited her marvellously,
although, as she confessed to herself, she did not much
care for the fashionable cloche shape with its severely-untrimmed
lines. There were jumpers, matronly jumpers,
which she realized with amazement looked very well on
her although up till then she had only considered
jumpers as suitable for young girls. There were boxes
and boxes of underclothing, whose price had horrified
her at first, until she had taken heart of grace from the
knowledge of all the money there was to spend.
Naturally, she had not yet received the tailored costume
and the coatfrock for which she had been measured by
a woman’s tailor who had appeared startlingly in the
shop as she finished her other purchases—startlingly, that
is to say, to Mrs Marble, unacquainted with the commission-sharing
system of ladies’ shops and with the conveniences
of the telephone.</p>

<p>But that costume and the coatfrock would not have
been any good to her even if she had had it. Mrs Marble
had indeed roused herself to put on some of the underclothing,
priceless things, warm and weightless, costing
as much as her husband had earned in a month before
all this started happening, but she had not the heart
to put on a pair of the thick silk stockings while she had
so much housework still to be done, and she wore over
the wonderful underclothing her usual draggled housefrock.
With the other things arriving shortly she might
as well have put on her best frock, but she had not the
heart to do that with so much washing-up to be done
that evening. Mrs Marble felt aggrieved. Besides, she was
tired, and her back really did hurt.</p>

<p>A day or two ago she had pictured herself sitting at
her ease in the evenings, wearing a wonderful frock, with
her skin deliciously thrilled by the contact of the silken
underclothing. As it was, she wore a shabby frock and
there was a bowlful of washing-up clamouring for her
attention in the kitchen. It was this that roused her to
surprising rebellion—very mild rebellion, but any sort of
rebellion was surprising in Mrs Marble.</p>

<p>‘I’ll have Mrs Summers in during the daytime when
you don’t know anything about it,’ she said.</p>

<p>The words brought Mr Marble out of his chair in a
panic. That would be worse than the other thing; it
would start gossip of a more poisonous sort than ever,
and gossip better directed towards the real food for
suspicion, for Mrs Marble would have to tell Mrs
Summers that he did not like having other people about
the house. He glared at her with frightful intensity.</p>

<p>‘You mustn’t, you mustn’t ever do anything like that,’
he said, and his voice was cracked and shrill. His clenched
fists shook in his agitation. Mrs Marble could only stare
at him, surprised and speechless.</p>

<p>‘You mustn’t do it. Do you hear me?’ he shrieked.</p>

<p>His agitation infected his wife, and she fumbled
nervously with the sewing on her lap.</p>

<p>‘Yes, dear.’</p>

<p>‘Yes, dear! Yes, dear! I don’t want any of your “yes,
dears”. You must promise me, promise me faithfully, that
you won’t ever do that. If ever I find out, I’ll—I’ll——’</p>

<p>Mr Marble’s high-pitched scream died away as the
door swung open. John had come running down as soon
as he heard his father’s voice at that hysterical pitch. It
was not very long since the last time he had heard it
like that, and then he had had to carry his mother up to
bed, and she had a bruise on her face.</p>

<p>John stood by the door with the light on his face. Mr
Marble shrank back a little, and his lips wrinkled back
from his teeth. He was the rat in the corner once more.
Hatred flashed from the father to the son. It was not
John’s fault, nor, by that time, was it Mr Marble’s. For
James Medland, he who had come in that memorable
evening, nearly a year ago now, was John’s cousin when
all was said and done, and there was a considerable
family likeness. As John stood by the door he was in
the same attitude and in the same light as Medland had
been in, that evening, when he had entered the dining-room
after Winnie had opened the door to him. No
wonder that Mr Marble hated John, and had hated him
ever since he first noticed the likeness, that evening when
he had struck his wife.</p>

<p>Father looked at son, son looked at father. The room
was all aglare with gilded furniture. The diamond in
Mr Marble’s tiepin winked and glittered as he shrank
slowly back before John’s slow and menacing advance.
John had come to protect his mother, but the desperate
challenge in his father’s attitude had roused him to the
limit of his self-control. It was Mrs Marble who saved
the situation. She glanced terror-stricken at her husband’s
snarling countenance, and at the wrinkled scowl of her
son. In utter fear she flung herself into the breach.</p>

<p>‘John, go away,’ she said. ‘Go—quickly—it’s all right.’</p>

<p>John checked himself, and his hands unclenched. Mrs
Marble’s hand was on her heart; for in that same second
she had seen what her husband had seen long before, and
she had guessed that it was this that had called up that
ferocity into his face. She was frightened, and she did
not yet know why.</p>

<p>‘Go, go, go,’ wailed Mrs Marble, and then, with a
supreme effort, ‘There’s nothing to worry about John.
You had better go to bed. Good night, sonny.’</p>

<p>When he had gone, silent, wordless as when he had
entered, Mrs Marble sank into a chair and laid her face
on her arms on the gilded table and sobbed and sobbed,
heartbroken, while her husband stood morosely beside
her, hands in pockets, the gaudy glare of the ornate
furniture mocking him, mocking his hopes of the future,
mocking his submerged, sensual dreamings of Madame
Collins.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER IX</span></h1></div>

<p>After this episode matters went for some time exactly
as Mr Marble would have wished. John’s application to
enter Sydenham College was favourably received, and he
went there without further demur. He was not quite
sixteen. There was more trouble about Winnie. Mr
Marble obtained from scholastic agents a list of all the
more expensive girls’ schools, but his endeavours to enter
Winnie in one of them were baulked for some time.
They displayed a not unnatural reluctance to receive in
their midst a girl of nearly fifteen who hailed from an
address in a dubious street in a south London suburb,
and who had been educated so far at a Council school
and at a secondary school. But at last a Berkshire school
accepted her—it was incidentally the most expensive of
all—and then there was a flurrying and a scurrying to
get ready the vast outfit that the rules of the school
demanded. There was a special type of gymnasium frock
to be obtained, and day clothes and evening clothes and,
crowning glory of all, a riding-habit and boots. Mr
Marble was delighted. He certainly seemed prouder of
Winnie’s outfit than she was herself.</p>

<p>And so, after Easter, the same day that Mr and Mrs
Marble, he dressed in his very best to impress the other
girls’ parents and the other girls, she rather tearful, with
her appearance not justifying the amount spent on it,
saw Winnie off from Paddington, John put on the blue
and black cap of Sydenham College and set off on his
two-mile walk thither, not feeling at all happy, with all
the mysteries of Rugby football and the prevailing
etiquette of the new school before him.</p>

<p>True, his father had been jolly decent to him lately.
He had given him nearly all the pocket-money he wanted,
while in a tiny lock-up garage at the end of Malcolm
Road there reposed the giant two-cylinder motor-bicycle
that his heart had yearned for. John had averaged a
hundred miles a day on it for the last week, delighting
in learning its mechanical whims, making gallant and
occasionally successful attempts to climb hills in ‘top’,
and finding all the wonderful bits of country that lie
near London just out of reach of the ordinary bicycle. It
was a good way of forgetting saying good-bye to the old
school, where he had been happy for nearly five years—and
saying good-bye to his old friends, too.</p>

<p>John was violently unhappy. It was not altogether
the new school that made him so, not by any means. It
was affairs at home. His father was drunk five nights out
of seven, and that was the least of his troubles. Most
times Mr Marble’s drunkenness did not disturb the rest
of the family as much as might be expected, for on those
occasions he kept himself very strictly to himself—shut
up in the drawing-room gazing out over the backyard.
Only twice had John to interfere actively between his
mother and his father, fearing that he would do her an
injury, but John knew in his soul that there was a far
worse trouble than drunkenness in his house. His mother
was looking pinched and thin, and he guessed repeatedly
that she had been crying during the day. His father’s
unaccountable moroseness probably caused that, combined
with the fatigue resulting from his unreasonable
refusal to allow her to have any help about the house.
Yet John could not find any definite beginning to this
moroseness and cross-grainedness, for Mr Marble had
drunk more than was good for him and had neglected
his wife long before James Medland had made his
solitary visit to 53 Malcolm Road. John looked upon
the unpleasing traits in his father’s character as plants
of slow growth and poisonous flowering.</p>

<p>All John knew was that there was trouble in the family,
terrible trouble, too, and he guessed, childlike, at his
father’s hatred for him and resented it with a hatred
equally bitter. The gifts that his father had showered on
him so profusely lately he had accepted because there
was hardly any other course open to him; and he had
offered no thanks, because he had seen that what Mr
Marble desired more than anything was to dazzle him
with his profusion, and—somewhere—there was a lurking
suspicion that these gifts were a sort of bribe, offered
to keep him in a good temper.</p>

<p>But at fifteen—nearly sixteen—John had not thought
out all these things in the clear-cut fashion of print. He
still thought child fashion, all instinct and intuition, but
that did not make him any the less unhappy. In fact, it
tended rather in the contrary direction.</p>

<p>It was hardly surprising that during that term John
found himself very much to himself, and that his already
well-developed taste for being solitary increased under
stress of circumstances. At school he was that most uncomfortable
of beings, the old new boy. The thirteen-year-old
at a new school enters a low form, where he
finds others of his kind with whom to congregate; he is
not expected to know the little points of etiquette that
are so vastly important; friends come to him automatically.
But John found himself in the Remove, only one
form below the Sixth. The others in his form had long
ago formed their own particular sets and cliques, and
not one of them had room for John. They had been at
no pains to conceal their amusement at the one or two
blunders into which he unwittingly fell, and, if the truth
must be told, their opinion of him was not increased by
the knowledge that he had come from the secondary
school a mile away for which they had an unreasoning
contempt. John resented their attitude towards him,
resented it bitterly, and was unwise enough to show it.
That raised the baiting of ‘young Marble’ in the eyes of
his schoolfellows from the level of a pastime to that of a
duty. His very name, of course, gave them endless opportunities
for being witty. It ended, as was inevitable, in
John’s flinging away from them in disgust, thanking God
he was a day boy, and only coming into contact with his
fellows when the elastic rules of compulsory games compelled
him to.</p>

<p>But unhappily it was just as bad with the fellows with
whom he had been friendly at the other school. He went
to some pains to look them up and to keep in touch with
them, but he was soon conscious of how far they had
fallen apart. There was just a trace of suspicion in their
attitude towards him—they were always ready to note,
and resent, any hint of condescension on his part. Their
holidays were different now, for the secondary school had
all day on Saturday free, while John was at school in
the morning, receiving Wednesday afternoon instead, and
the long excursions they were in the habit of making
could not be cut down by half to allow him to join
them. Besides, did he not have a motor-bicycle, so that he
would see no point in sweating with them on a push-bike?
And in honest truth John soon found that the
savour had gone out of pedal-cycling now that he knew
the joys of forty miles an hour on the Giant Twin. Once
or twice, at John’s urgent invitation, they had come to
53 Malcolm Road, but John had found himself regretting
the invitation as soon as it had been accepted. Those
rooms full of gaudy furniture did not make them feel
at home. Mr Marble had been barely civil to them, and
had made obvious the fact that he was not entirely sober;
John, desperately sensitive, had suspected them of finding
much to joke about among themselves at the Marble
<span class='it'>ménage</span>, and had hated himself for his disloyalty at
thinking them capable of such a thing and yet had still
gone on thinking it.</p>

<p>All things considered, it was as well that John had the
consolation offered him by the Giant Twin. That bulky
machine became as good as a brother to him, sharing
his troubles and giving him, in the very few mechanical
defects it developed, other things to think about than the
drunkenness of his father and the disorder of his home.</p>

<p>It is only doing Mr Marble bare justice to admit that
he was happily unconscious of the turmoil in his son’s
life. He had other things to think about, too, matters of
life and death. The old obsessions were gripping him
hard, despite all the distractions offered him in the fact
of his having a son at the College, and a daughter at the
most expensive school in Berkshire, and a new interest
in his life centring in a house in the next road whose
gate was adorned with a brass plate bearing the legend
‘Madame Collins, Modes and Robes’. The evenings were
many when the lure of that house was not sufficient to
drag him away from his steady watching over the backyard
from his coign of vantage in the drawing-room.</p>

<p>Marble had more to lose now: security of income, a
house full of Empire furniture, a rapidly-expanding and
catholic library of books on criminal matters, as much
whisky as he was able to drink, a woman who took a
more than friendly interest in him. And the irony of it
lay in the fact that the more he had to lose the more
anxious he was not to lose it, and the more difficult it
became in consequence to enjoy all these priceless possessions.
Those summer months fled past him like a
maelstrom; he was hardly conscious of what was happening
around him. The sweets of life were bitter to his
palate, in that they were poisoned by the girding worry
that was ever present and ever increasing.</p>

<p>The summer term flashed by. It hardly seemed a week
since he had seen Winnie off from Paddington before
his wife began to make arrangements for her return.
Then she spoke to Mr Marble about holidays.</p>

<p>‘Holidays,’ said Mr Marble, vaguely.</p>

<p>‘Yes, dear. We’re going away this summer, aren’t we?’</p>

<p>‘I don’t know,’ said Mr Marble. ‘Are we?’</p>

<p>‘We didn’t go away at all last summer,’ said Mrs
Marble, ‘and the one before that we only had those few
days at Worthing. We can afford it, can’t we?’</p>

<p>‘M’yes. I suppose so. But I don’t know what arrangements
the office are making.’</p>

<p>‘Oh, dear,’ said Mrs Marble. She had looked forward to
a holiday this year, if only to get away from having to
look after that house and to give her a chance of wearing
all the wonderful clothes she had bought.</p>

<p>‘I suppose you had better go anyway,’ said Mr Marble,
who was absolutely determined that he, for one, was not
going to leave that house unguarded. ‘I’ll look up some
nice hotel for you and the kids to go to. I might come
down for a bit if I can get away from the office.’</p>

<p>Annie Marble drew her breath in sharply. A hotel!
No washing-up, no bother about food, servants to do her
bidding; it seemed like a prospect of heaven. There was
just a slight momentary fear in her bosom as she thought
of possible motives in Mr Marble’s handsome offer, but
her suspicions were too unformed for her to be very
worried, and further, there were two possible motives for
Mr Marble wishing to be left in the house, and Mrs
Marble was a little too muddleheaded to disentangle
them. Instead, she accepted gratefully.</p>

<p>‘But are you sure you’ll be all right, dear?’ she said,
perforce.</p>

<p>‘Of course I will.’ And that settled the matter.</p>

<p>Soon after Winnie came back from school, strangely
mature, and rapidly fulfilling her early promise of
beauty. She seemed a different girl, somehow. There was
an alteration in her speech. Not that she had ever talked
broad cockney—her other school friends had always considered
her ‘refined’, but the slight trace of a twang when
she used the higher registers had now disappeared, in
fact, she did not employ those higher registers at all now.
She talked more throatily—‘pound-notey’ was the terse
descriptive phrase popular in that district—and she was
much more self-possessed and placid than she had been
when she went away. Mr Marble was pleased, as pleased
as he could be at that period—he was going through
rather a bad time just then—and Mrs Marble, as was
inevitable, was heartily sorry. Winnie had grown away
from her.</p>

<p>But neither of her parents, much as they fussed about
her when she arrived, noticed her tiny lift of the eyebrows
as she entered their wonderful dining-room, with
its wonderful mosaic table. Winnie had now had experience
of what good rooms look like, and to her,
the half-forgotten gaudiness of the gilt furniture in
terrible contrast to the faded wallpaper was indescribably
vulgar.</p>

<p>Later she hinted as much to her mother, but her comments
were not received very gratefully. Mrs Marble at
once began to fidget with her sewing—a sure sign that
she was embarrassed.</p>

<p>‘Your father has one or two odd fancies, dear,’ she said,
fumbling, blushing and stammering. ‘I shouldn’t mention
it to him if I were you. He doesn’t like the idea
of having a lot of people about the house, as we should
have to have if we had any decorations done. Besides,’—she
bridled a little, for she was as proud as was her
husband of the gilt furniture.—‘I’m sure this room looks
very well indeed. I’m sure nobody in this road has anything
half as good in their house. I don’t expect there
are many rooms like this in London, even. And, of course,
every room in the house is done in the same way. Madame
Collins says it’s as good as the Louvre, and she ought
to know, seeing she’s been there.’</p>

<p>And that at once placed the matter beyond argument,
for Madame Collins was by now a great friend of the
family’s. But Winnie would not have argued about it,
anyway. She merely made a mental note of the fact and
said no more about it. That was typical of Winnie.</p>

<p>But Mrs Marble had by now become well started on the
subject that absorbed so many of her few thoughts.</p>

<p>‘You mustn’t think any the less of your father, dear,
because—because—he is a little odd at times. He has a
great deal to worry him, you know, and I’m sure you
ought to be grateful to him for all he’s done.’</p>

<p>‘Of course I am,’ said Winnie, sweetly. It had never
occurred to her to be grateful.</p>

<p>‘I’m so glad. I—I was a little afraid that when you
came back from your fine school you might find that—that—everything
was not quite as you would like it.’</p>

<p>‘Do you mean because father drinks?’</p>

<p>‘Winnie!’ Mrs Marble showed in her expression how
shocked she was at this calling of a spade a spade.</p>

<p>‘But he does, mother, now doesn’t he?’</p>

<p>‘Y—es, I suppose he does. But not very much, dear. Not
more than you could expect, seeing how much his business
worries him. And you didn’t ought to speak about
it like that, Winnie. It doesn’t sound nice.’</p>

<p>Poor Mrs Marble had by now nearly as much to worry
her as her husband had. It might almost be worse in
her case, for she did not know really what it was she
had to worry about, and her not over-exuberant imagination
could not allow her even to guess. And the worry
of defending her husband to her children on unnamed
and unguessed-at charges was nearly as great as everything
else put together.</p>

<p>For her children were small comfort to her now. John
was gawky and shy, and she could not know of the love
he bore her, especially as the memory of the times when
he had come to defend her from her husband stood as
a barrier between them which neither of them had the
moral courage to surmount at a rush. And Winnie—even
Mrs Marble felt this—was just a little bit <span class='it'>superior</span>
nowadays.</p>

<p>Yet even Winnie was for the moment mollified by the
announcement that they were going to stay for a month
at the Grand Pavilion Hotel at a very fashionable south
coast resort. That would be much nicer than staying all
the holidays at Malcolm Road, and it would be something
to tell the girls about when she went back to
school. Some of these might go to France, some to Italy,
but there would be few who would spend their holidays
at such a place as the Grand Pavilion Hotel. Their
parents would have more sense.</p>

<p>And the packing, and the preparation! Winnie helped
her mother sort out her astonishing wardrobe. In the tiny
cupboards of the bedroom upstairs, where the gilt cupids
climbed eternally about the big bed, there were heaps of
the most assorted clothes it was possible to conceive.
Mingled with the frightfully expensive costumes, there
were old rags dating back from the dark ages before the
rise of the franc. Mrs Marble, apparently, wore indifferently
the pastel shade silk underclothes bought in Bond
Street and the wool and cotton mixture garments, neither
decorative nor useful, which she had had before the
arrival of these others. The explanation was really simple.
Never in her life before had Mrs Marble had any clothes
to give away; they were all worn to rags long before she
could spare them. She could not get into the habit of
disposing of her older wardrobe. In fact, it is much to be
doubted whether she had ever contemplated giving away
garments in which there still remained six months’ wear,
according to earlier standards of economy. And all the
clothes, worn and unworn, were badly looked after, unbrushed
and hung on hooks without hangers.</p>

<p>Even one term at a boarding-school had taught Winnie
to do better than this, and for two hectic days she took
her mother’s clothes in hand, sorting and folding, ruthlessly
relegating some to the rag-basket, wondering over
others. It was beyond her powers to imagine her mother
in underclothing of orange silk or <span class='it'>eau de nil</span>; it was
almost beyond it to imagine her well dressed at all, but
Winnie contrived to arrange that her mother looked
more like the mothers whom she had seen at the school
occasionally. Mrs Marble was almost tearfully grateful.</p>

<p>‘I don’t seem to have time to do all this,’ she said. ‘And—and—it
doesn’t seem worth it, sometimes. Your father
is a very busy man, you know, dear.’</p>

<p>The cupids that climbed about the big Empire bed
had climbed in vain for months now, that was what Mrs
Marble implied, although she would never have dreamed
of hinting as much to her daughter.</p>

<p>And in all this rush to put Mrs Marble’s wardrobe in
order Winnie herself was not forgotten. She had to have
new frocks as well, for her stay at the Grand Pavilion
Hotel, and Winnie’s taste, which was allowed almost complete
freedom, was at its best a little juvenile. Mrs Marble
was a shade frightened when she saw some of the things
Winnie had chosen, but it was beyond her to protest. She
had only the haziest idea as to what was the correct wear
for a girl of fifteen at the Grand Pavilion Hotel.</p>

<p>‘There’s a lot in being bobbed,’ said Winnie to herself
in the glass, attentively studying her features while her
mother was safely out of the way. ‘No one can ever really
tell how old you are. If I weren’t bobbed, I wouldn’t have
my hair up, and then anyone could tell. But as it is, with
my new frocks and everything, I think I’ll have rather
a nice time this holiday. And there’ll be something to
tell them about when I get back to school.’</p>

<p>Winnie and her mother were pleasantly excited when
the cab came to take them to Victoria. John was not with
them. He had decided to go on alone on the Giant Twin,
despite Winnie’s faint protest that a motor-bicycle was
highly vulgar.</p>

<p>Mr Marble, too, was pleasantly excited when he waved
good-bye to them. For reasons of his own he was glad to
know that his daughter was out of the way. He had felt
uncomfortable in her presence. That three months, three
months of good food and of close intimacy with people
who never had the slightest difficulty with their aitches,
had caused her to grow away from her family at a surprising
rate. Mr Marble was not even comfortable with
his daughter when he was drunk. And every moment he
feared lest she should demand that they should move to
a bigger and better house, or failing that, that they should
have the present house redecorated and arranged as
nearly as possible like the houses of the girls she had
known at school. It was not the expense that Mr Marble
feared. Instead, he was thrown into agonies of terror at
the thought of workmen nosing around his house, and
of piles of ladders and boards heaped up in his backyard.
The foot of a ladder might easily dig some inches deep
into the soft soil of the barren flower-bed.</p>

<p>When he was sober, Mr Marble had his suspicions, too,
that his children were neither grateful for nor impressed
by the benefit he had heaped upon them. He even suspected
them of not admiring the mosaic table as much
as they should have done. In a ferment of self-pity he
realized that he was not getting full return for all his
outlay. When he could blame it on to circumstances he
did not mind so much; but there were a few aching
moments, when the whisky had failed to bite as it should,
when it was forced home on him that it was his fault.
There were times when he could not visualize himself,
as he usually could, as the triumphant criminal, surmounting
all difficulties, over-riding all obstacles, tearing
success out of the very teeth of failure. Instead, there
came moments when he saw himself in his true colours,
as the cornered rat he was, struggling with the courage
of desperation against the fate that would inevitably
close upon him sooner or later. When these black periods
came he would clutch hurriedly at his glass and drain it
thirstily. Thank God, there was always whisky in exchange
for his money—and Marguerite Collins.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER X</span></h1></div>

<p>Madame Collins was a highly successful intriguer,
now that she had gained experience and the poise given
by experience. To no one in the suburbs, not even to the
milk roundsman, is given the opportunity for gossip
which the suburban dressmaker enjoys. After the costume
has been fitted, and changing naturally from the easy and
fertile subject of clothes, there comes a time in every
interview with every customer when local affairs must
be discussed. Some merely talk parish shop, and with
these Madame Collins had to walk warily, but most are
only too willing to discuss neighbours, especially to a
sympathetic audience of one, and that a woman. Madame
Collins heard all about Mr Marble’s newly acquired
wealth almost as soon as he acquired it. She had noted
the information mentally; rich men were always desirable
acquaintances, especially to a woman utterly wearied of
life in a suburb on very little money after the varied
experiences she had enjoyed as a girl in a district occupied
by English troops during the war.</p>

<p>The historic meeting with Mr Marble on the day that
the furniture arrived was only partly planned. Madame
Collins had been walking along Malcolm Road on perfectly
legitimate business when she had seen all the massy
gilt being carried in, and she had been impressed. They
must have cost a great deal of money, even if they were
in abominable taste, and then when she had seen Mr
Marble himself, tiepin, wrist-watch, cigarette case, well-cut
clothes and all, her mind was at once made up. There
must be a great deal of truth in what she had heard about
his money. It was the easiest thing in the world to scrape
acquaintance with him after that.</p>

<p>Then in a week’s time what Madame Collins did not
know about the Marble <span class='it'>ménage</span> was hardly worth knowing—save
for the, to her, unimportant detail about a
certain transaction consummated twenty months before
in the Marbles’ dining-room. Neighbours had already
hinted that all was not well between Mr Marble and
his wife, and that was all the knowledge Madame Collins
asked for. A rich man estranged from his wife, and that
wife simple enough to be easily hoodwinked, living conveniently
near, meant all the colour and all the money
that Madame Collins’ drab life demanded—especially
seeing that he was obviously a raw hand in dealings with
women, and had not yet had his money long enough to
be spoilt by it.</p>

<p>To Mrs Marble, Marguerite Collins had borne Greek
gifts. She had offered her a friendship which the lonely
woman had eagerly accepted. She had invited her to her
little house in the next street, and there had introduced
her to her husband, proving that she was a perfectly
respectable married woman. Annie Marble did not
appreciate what a cipher Collins himself was.</p>

<p>For Collins was a dull and a tragic figure. He was
cursed with an intense sensitiveness for music combined
with complete absence of creative talent. All his life,
with the exception of a violent interval in France during
the last year of the war culminating in his marriage to
Marguerite, he had earned his living tuning pianos. He
was a very good piano tuner, and highly prized by the
firm that employed him. Therein lay the tragedy. For
the perfect piano tuner must never play the piano. If he
does, he loses half his worth as a tuner. His ear loses that
shade of anxious accuracy that makes him the perfect
tuner. So Collins, thirsty for music, inexpressibly moved
by music, spent his life in a piano factory tuning pianos,
eternally tuning pianos. No wonder that Marguerite
Collins found life drab.</p>

<p>Collins accepted the advent of the Marbles into his
wife’s life with the lack of interest that he evinced towards
everything. He talked with weary politeness to Marble
himself on the one or two occasions that the latter had
accompanied Annie there. But he probably did not know
their names. After all these years of married life he had
ceased to be interested in his wife’s doings. Marguerite,
red-haired, brown-eyed, tempestuously passionate, and
with her native peasant craftiness to guide her, was by
no means the ideal wife for him. By that time they both
knew it.</p>

<p>Marguerite played her new capture with dexterous
skill—not that there was much skill needed, seeing that
Marble’s greatest wish at the moment was to be her
captive, provided no one else knew about it. There had
been glances from her hot brown eyes into which Mr
Marble was at liberty to weave all sorts of meanings.
There had been strange coincidences when she had
happened to be out shopping just when Mr Marble was
walking home from the bus that brought him from the
station. There had been times, anxiously awaited, when
he had escorted her home after she had been to Malcolm
Road calling in the evening. Then, in the comforting
darkness, she had walked close at his side so that he could
feel her warmth against his. She had long ago decided
that she would yield to him, but she was not going to
yield too readily. She wanted money as well as intrigue,
money that she could put into the bank account that
stood in her name alone, in which her husband had no
share. Peasant avarice was in her blood, the avarice that
demands hard money and plenty of it—enough too, to
enable her to forsake her spiritless husband and live her
own life in Rouen or even Paris.</p>

<p>But she nearly miscalculated, owing to her not being
in possesion of all the data. There came a time when in
place of the pleasant lunches in town—when she had
to be up buying her materials—a little dinner was suggested.
Marguerite had the whole scene in her mind’s
eye. There would be a private room, and a discreet waiter,
and plenty of good wine—Burgundy, she thought would
be best. Then, with Mr Marble well warmed and comforted,
would come the tale of unexpected business losses
and of pressing debts. Mr Marble might not believe it;
he would be welcome not to. But he would offer a loan,
nevertheless, and when she had it safely in her purse,
she would melt with gratitude towards him. She would
be overcome, yielding, tender. Then she would hear no
more about that ‘loan’. But the farce would be necessary,
nevertheless. Otherwise Mr Marble might get unwelcome
ideas into his head—that it was solely by his charms that
he had overcome her resistance. Marguerite preferred to
have matters on a sound business footing.</p>

<p>At first everything went according to plan. Marguerite
arrived only ten minutes late, just enough to make Mr
Marble anxious and yet not long enough seriously to
annoy him. And at the sight of her all anxiety vanished.
She was in splendid evening dress, low-cut and dazzling,
so that Mr Marble caught his breath as he looked at her.
He himself was in a lounge suit, as was necessary with
a wife at home who would look for some explanation
should he do anything so extraordinary as to go out in
dress clothes.</p>

<p>There had been no difficulty about obtaining a room
to themselves; the waiter had been discreet, the wine had
been good, the dinner excellent. Marguerite noted with
pleasure that Marble ate hardly anything. He seemed
to be in a fever.</p>

<p>Marble sat at the table. He was paying no attention
to the woman opposite him. Coffee and liqueur brandy
stood awaiting his leisure. The waiter had gone for good,
with his bill paid. Marguerite was about to bring her
carefully-rehearsed story into action, when she noticed
the look on his face. He was staring, staring hard, past
her at the opposite wall. In that direction lay the door
that led into the tawdry bedroom, but clearly he was not
thinking about that. The stare was a stare of agony.</p>

<p>Marble had felt uneasy almost as soon as the arrival
of Madame Collins had set free his thoughts to wander
where they would. He had a sudden awful suspicion that
while he was dallying here someone was interfering with
the flower-bed in his backyard. It would be poetic justice
if it were so—newspaper poetic justice. He could imagine
their baldly moral comments in the flaming reports that
would appear in the next day’s papers. Cases of that kind,
where there had been long concealment of the body,
were nearly as popular in the newspapers as cases where
the body had been cut up or burnt. And he would be
dragged away. Then—his thoughts jumped back to half-remembered
fragments of a stray copy of <span class='it'>The Ballad of
Reading Gaol</span> which had come into his possession. There
was something about ‘the black dock’s dreadful pen’. His
mind hovered there for a space, and then fled on through
all the horrible verses about ‘the silent men who watch
him night and day’ and about crossing his own coffin
as he moves into the hideous shed. Then writhing into
his mind came the lines about having a cloth upon his
face and a noose about his neck. Marble’s breath came
croakingly through his dry, parted lips. In imagination
he already had a cloth upon his face. He could feel it,
stifling, blinding him, while the officials padded warily
about him making all ready. Marble struggled in his
chair.</p>

<p>Madame Collins’ voice came to him, apparently from
an immense distance, asking him if he were ill. Even then
he only came partially to himself. At her anxious questionings
he only laughed. Annie Marble had heard laughter
like that once in her life. It was a mirthless sound, a
disgusting sound. Marguerite shrank back in horror,
crossing herself. Marble’s chair scraped hideously as he
dragged himself up from the table.</p>

<p>‘Home,’ he said, leaning first on the table, then on her
shoulder, for support, ‘home, quickly.’</p>

<p>Downstairs they went together, he with dragging steps
yet striving to hasten, she with horror and fright in her
eyes. They went home as fast as a taxicab could take
them. Mr Marble’s fears had, of course, been baseless.
Not a soul had been in the backyard. But he could not
explain to Marguerite Collins about the silly fright he
had given himself. Nor, on the other hand, could he convince
himself that his fears were unjustified. The
obsession was growing. Mr Marble was experiencing more
and more reluctance to spend his spare time anywhere
whence he could not keep his eye on that backyard
of his. And yet he lusted after Marguerite Collins of the
warm hair as he lusted after little else. That was why
he was so pleasantly excited to see his family drive off
to Victoria on their way to the Grand Pavilion Hotel.</p>

<p>Marguerite was pleased, too. She was a woman of
strong common sense, and rapidly recovered from the
fright she had had.</p>

<p>For Marble began the happiest month he had known
since James Medland’s visit. There was no bothering
family to worry him at all. He cooked his own breakfast
after a fashion, and his other meals he had out save for
the occasions when he bought cooked food and consumed
it at home. The evenings were very long and pleasant
at first. He could sit and brood in the drawing-room with
a book about crimes on his knee, drinking as he wished,
without the worried eyes of his wife to cause him annoyance,
and even though sometimes his thoughts began to
stray towards detection and failure he was able at that
period to change them, in consequence of the new interest
he had. For sometimes as it grew dark, there would come
a hurried little tap at the door, and he would go and
open it to Marguerite Collins. She would come in superb,
wonderful, ripe to rottenness, and then Marble would
forget his troubles entirely for the time. He did not
appreciate her taste in wine, but he saw that there was
always wine for her. For himself he was content with
whisky, and the time would fly by. At the end of the
evening there would be a passing of a little bundle of
money—trust Marble to deal in cheques as little as
possible under these circumstances—and Marguerite
would slip out as quietly as she came.</p>

<p>They were strange evenings, half dream, half nightmare.
By a queer twist of thought, Marble found that the
sharing of his house and of its view of the backyard was
oddly comforting when Marguerite was with him. He
could lose himself within the nest of her warm, white
arms more completely than had ever been possible to
him before. Her dark eyes were like velvet with passion,
and her little gasps of love, only half simulated, led him
on and on into all the mazy, misty byways of sodden
animalism. From Marguerite at least he had value for
his money.</p>

<p>Even the awakening next morning, blear-eyed and
foul-mouthed, was not as wretched as might have been
thought. For at least he had grateful solitude, and to Mr
Marble solitude was very grateful, unless he had Marguerite
with him. There was no wife with the anxious
look in her eyes to worry him; he could roam round
the house and satisfy himself for the thousandth time
that the garden was undisturbed; he could dress himself
slowly and leave the house without all the fuss of saying
good-bye. He was usually half an hour late, of course,
but that did not matter. He knew that dismissal from
the office was near and inevitable, but he did not mind.
Every day he could see in the eyes of the junior partner
who had been so diffident about offering him five hundred
a year a growing annoyance at his sodden appearance
and unpunctual habits. Of course, he had done
nothing to earn the salary he received. He had assisted
the firm to no grand <span class='it'>coup</span> like the one he had brought
off for himself. That—he had known it all along—was
most unlikely now that he no longer had the spur of
imminent necessity. But the new firm could dismiss him
when it liked. He had twelve hundred a year of his own,
and he did not want to be bothered with business. So
to the office he went, red-eyed, unshaven, with shaking
hands. His scanty red hair was fast turning grey.</p>

<p>The rest of the Marble family was endeavouring to
enjoy itself. Some of its members were successful in
varying degrees. The trio itself had been the object of
amusement to the loungers in the palm-shaded entrance
hall. Mrs Marble was so badly dressed, despite Winnie’s
misguided efforts, and she was so obviously frightened
of porters and waiters; Winnie herself had roused some
interest in a few breasts. She was young, anyone could
see that, but not one of them guessed how young she
was. Her clothes simply called for comment, and her
actions likewise. Her face was over-powdered, and she
was developing a habit of looking sidelong at the men
in the lounge as she walked past them. That mixture of
youth and innocence and yet apparent readiness awoke
strange longings in the hearts of some of the old men
who viewed her.</p>

<p>The cunning ones approached the mother first. There
were chance conversations arising out of nothing in the
hotel lounge, and Mrs Marble was agreeably surprised
to have men with grey hair and the most perfect manners
treating her with as much respect as if she were a duchess.
She was flushed and flustered, but it was very nice to
have the society of these gentlemen. One or two of them
gave her the pleasure of dining at her table with herself
and her daughter, and sometimes one would accompany
them on some excursion to places in the neighbourhood.
Winnie thoroughly enjoyed herself.</p>

<p>There were one or two young men, too, who scraped
acquaintance with the queer party. One of them dropped
out when he discovered that Mrs Marble did not possess
much jewellery, and, in fact, did not care for jewellery,
but the others stayed on. They danced with Winnie in
the evenings, or took her ‘just for the rag’ to the local
theatre. They were nearly annoyed when they found that
Mrs Marble took it for granted that she was to accompany
them; but there was no thought in her mind save
just that. She could not picture a state of affairs in
which anyone would sooner be alone with her daughter
than have her present as well. But the men, young and
old alike, found that there was one sure way of enjoying
Winnie’s society unadulterated; that was to settle Mrs
Marble comfortably on the pier listening to the band,
in a deckchair, and then take Winnie for a walk round.
Mrs Marble was quite pleased when she found how
attentive the men all were to her, and to what pains
they went to see that she was quite comfortable and
had all she wanted. It was a pleasant change from
seventeen years odd of married life with William Marble.
And it was astonishing how often Winnie replied to
Mrs Marble’s question: ‘What would you like to do this
morning?’ (or this afternoon), with the ready response,
‘Oh, let’s go on to the pier and listen to the band,
Mother.’</p>

<p>But amid all this enjoyment John was not enjoying
himself. There was no place in the Grand Pavilion Hotel
where he could sit and read in comfort, and the beach
and the promenade were too crowded to permit such a
thing either. He always had the Giant Twin, of course,
but he did not always want to be out on it. Motor-cycling,
even on the finest example of the finest make
of motor-cycle in the world, begins to pall a little after
three weeks’ enforced indulgence, and there came a time
when John was frankly bored. He was bored with hotel
meals, with hotel friends, and with hotel public rooms.
Music at his meals ceased to have any attraction for him
at all. The men who sought Winnie’s society looked
upon him as an unmitigated nuisance, and were not too
careful about concealing their opinion. And Winnie held
the same opinion and did not try to conceal it at all.
He could not even discuss motor-bicycles with anyone,
in that he never met anyone who had ever owned such
a thing.</p>

<p>John was bored, utterly and absolutely. After a fortnight’s
stay he hinted as much to his mother, but hints
were not very effective in his mother’s case. Three days
later he tried again, with equal unsuccess. When he had
endured three whole weeks he took the bit between his
teeth and announced his intention of going home.</p>

<p>‘But, my dear, why?’ asked Mrs Marble.</p>

<p>John did his best to explain, but he felt from the start
it was hopeless. The intuition proved correct, for Mrs
Marble had no sympathy at all with boredom, never
being bored herself.</p>

<p>‘I don’t think father will like it if you go home,’ said
Mrs Marble. ‘He’s spent an awful lot on this holiday
for you, and you ought to show that you appreciate it.’</p>

<p>‘But there’s nothing to <span class='it'>do</span>,’ expostulated John.</p>

<p>‘Why, there’s lots and lots to do, dear. You can listen
to the band, or you can go out on the motor-bike, or—or—oh,
there’s lots to do. A great active boy like you
ought to find things to do as easily as anything.’</p>

<p>‘A great active boy can’t listen to a band all day
and all night,’ said John, ‘even if I was a boy, and even if
I <span class='it'>liked</span> listening to bands, which I don’t, very much.
Hang it, I can’t get hold of any decent books to read,
and when I do I can’t find anywhere to read them.’</p>

<p>‘Don’t argue with him, Mother,’ cut in Winnie. ‘He’s
only finding fault.’</p>

<p>‘Finding fault’ was in Mrs Marble’s eyes a sort of
vice to which the male sex was peculiarly prone at
inconvenient moments. She suffered on account of it
on occasions when Mr Marble’s temper was not all that
it should have been. Winnie seized the advantage conferred
upon her by this dexterous tactical thrust.</p>

<p>‘I don’t see why he shouldn’t go home, if you ask me,’
she said. ‘He’d be company for father, and it’s only for
a week, when all’s said and done.’</p>

<p>Her arguments were not particular happy, for
Mrs Marble remembered with a slight shudder the time
when she had flung herself between her son and her
husband. And she would be positively unhappy, whenever
she remembered to be, at the thought of two helpless
males alone in a house which cost her so much pains
to run. But Winnie had her own reasons for wishing
John away, reasons not unconnected with walks upon the
pier and with visits to local cinematograph theatres.</p>

<p>‘I should let him go,’ said Winnie. ‘Then he can collect
a few of the mouldy old books he wants to read. He’ll
soon get fed up with being at home, and then he can
come down here again. It’ll only be for a day or two.
He won’t stand cooking his own breakfast longer than
that. Then he’ll be able to tell you how father’s getting
on.’</p>

<p>It was a wily move. Mrs Marble, in the intervals between
being intimidated by waiters and chambermaids
and enjoying the luxury they represented, was occasionally
conscience-stricken about her deserted husband. She
heard from him very little—only one or two straggling
scrawls that told her nothing. More would have meant
too much trouble to Mr Marble. Winnie’s suggestion
was therefore well timed.</p>

<p>‘Well, do that then, dear,’ said Mrs Marble. ‘Go home
just for the night and get all the books and things you
want. Of course, if father doesn’t mind, you can stay
longer if you like. But you mustn’t do anything that
might make him cross.’</p>

<p>It was hardly the free-handed <span class='it'>congé</span> that Winnie would
have liked her to give, but, still, it was something.</p>

<p>When John announced his intention of starting off
at once Mrs Marble was shocked into protest. To her
there was something unthinkable in changing one’s place
of abode at ten minutes’ notice. She succeeded in persuading
her son into postponing his departure until the
next day—Saturday.</p>

<p>Even then she was full of instructions at the last
moment.</p>

<p>‘You know where the clean sheets are, don’t you, dear?’
she said. ‘They’re in the lowest drawer in the big chest
of drawers. Mind you air them before you put them on
your bed. Oh, and when you come down again will you
bring my white fur? It’s getting rather cold in the evenings
now. You’re sure you know the way home all right?
It’s rather a long way to go all by yourself.’</p>

<p>John had often before covered three times the distance
in a single day, but he forbore saying so. He felt that it
would be wiser to let his mother run on and have her
full say out and then he would clear off without further
argument. She continued, unmindful:</p>

<p>‘I shall be quite anxious to hear that you got home
safely. Mind you write as soon as you’re there, and be
sure you tell me how father is. And—and—don’t forget
what I said about not doing anything to annoy father.’</p>

<p>That made John fidget uneasily in his chair. At long
last Mrs Marble ended with:</p>

<p>‘Well, good-bye, dear. Have a good time. Have you got
enough money? Then good-bye. Don’t forget what I said.
We’re just going on the pier with Mr Horne. Good-bye,
dear.’</p>

<p>And Winnie and Mrs Marble and Mr Horne were
gone.</p>

<p>That was a most enjoyable day for John. For once
he was neither the hotel prisoner nor yet was he at home
with his father. It was the transition stage. He spent his
time deliciously, luxuriously. He bathed by himself, at
the far end of the town—his last bathe before starting
out for home. That took time, for he wanted to make the
most of it. Then he came back to the Grand Pavilion
Hotel, took the Giant Twin from the garage, where it
stood impatient and intolerant of all these domesticated
saloons and limousines. The kickstarter swung obediently,
and the engine broke into its sweet thunderous
roar. John swung himself into the saddle, and the Giant
Twin sprang impatiently forward as he let in the clutch.
They climbed the steep ascent of the side street without
an effort, nosed their way through the squalor of the
slums at the back of the town, and in fifteen minutes
were out on the free open downs. But John was determined
not to waste a minute of his day’s happiness. He
curbed the ardour of the Giant Twin to a mere fourteen
miles an hour—a Rosinante speed worthy of his quixotic
mood, as he told himself. They ambled along the great
high road in wonderful spirits. The wind blew past him
gently, and he filled his lungs with it, sighing with
pleasure. It was twelve o’clock when he started; by one
o’clock not thirty miles—not half the way—had been
covered. John lunched by himself at a big yet homely
hotel by the roadside. It was a decided change from lunch
at the Grand Pavilion Hotel, with a band blaring only
ten feet away, and mother talking platitudes—she
couldn’t help that, poor dear, but it grew wearisome after
a week or two—and Winnie looking round discreetly at
the men, or, worse, chattering away to some greasy-haired
fellow she had wangled mother into inviting. They were
all greasy-haired, somehow, and not one of them knew
how to speak to a fellow, not even the young ones. And
as for the old ones! There was one doddering old idiot
who had asked him if he kept white mice! John stretched
his legs in comforting fashion under the table and lit
a cigarette. Thank God, that was over, anyway. He
couldn’t have borne that place another day. He hoped
he would be all right with father. Father was such an
uncertain sort of fellow nowadays. But apparently all
he wanted was to be left alone, and that was all he
wanted, as well. So they ought to get on all right. If
they didn’t—well, it couldn’t be as bad as the hotel,
anyway, with mother fussing over him and Winnie
scrapping all the time. There was a little bit of the boor
and a little bit of the bear about John.</p>

<p>But he was light-hearted enough when he came down
and started up the Giant Twin once more for the last
run homeward. He still went slowly, partly of his own
free will, partly because of the growing volume of Saturday
traffic that he met. He turned away from Croydon,
and the Giant Twin brought him triumphantly up the
long hill to the Crystal Palace without an effort. Ten
minutes later the motor-bicycle ran silently with the
clutch out, down the slope of Malcolm Road, and pulled
up gently outside Number 53. John dismounted slowly.
It had been a glorious day. Even now it was not yet
evening. There was nothing better than a late afternoon
in August, at the end of a flaming day. The rather depressing
little road looked positively heavenly to the
exile after three weeks at the Grand Pavilion Hotel.
There was just a touch of red in the sky, where the sun
was beginning to sink. John was half smiling as he looked
round him, while he fumbled in his pocket for his
latch-key. He was even smiling as he put the key in the
lock, and as he walked into the house.</p>

<p>Mr Marble had lately been looking forward to his
Saturday afternoons. Following a lazy morning at the
office, and a lazy lunch in town, he could travel quietly
homeward after the rush. And at home, for in this case
it was worth daring the watchfulness of the neighbours,
especially considering that arriving as she did before
he came back they might well think that she had come
on some neighbourly errand in bringing shopping or to
see that all was well in the house, there would be waiting
for him Madame Collins, Marguerite—Rita, he called
her nowadays. And they would have the whole afternoon
and evening before them. She would not be leaving
before dark. It would be a wonderful day. Eat, drink,
and be merry, for to-morrow you die. Mr Marble ate,
and most decidedly he drank, and he was merry as well,
if such a term can be applied to his nightmare feeling of
wild abandon. And the abandon was only possible because
he was at 53 Malcolm Road, and able to make sure
that there was no chance of his dying suddenly yet awhile.</p>

<p>John came into the dining-room. There was no one
there. But the sight of the room brought the first chill
to his heart. The gilded furniture blazed tawdrily in the
fading sunlight; the room was in an indescribable
muddle: dirty dishes and empty bottles were littered
about it, and cigarette ash and cigarette ends were
strewn over the floor. And in the room there was a subtle
and distasteful blend of scents. Overlying the stale
tobacco smell and the fustiness of unopened windows
was the smell of spilt drink, and permeating the whole
there was yet another odour, slight yet penetrating—a
stale, unpleasant smell as of degraded hyacinths. John’s
nose wrinkled in distaste as the vile reek assailed his
nostrils. The drink, and the tobacco, and the fustiness,
and the muddle he could account for, and he had been
prepared for them on a smaller scale. But this other
scent, irritating his clean boy’s palate, was different. It
was more unclean even than the others.</p>

<p>He left the room hurriedly. He had already half
decided that his father was not at present in the house.
He set his foot on the stairs to go to his own room to
open the windows, open them wide, so that the clean
evening air would circulate there at any rate, but he
withdrew it as a thought struck him. Most probably
his father was in the back room—it had been his habit
for a long time now to sit there on most occasions. If
he were there, and if, as John reluctantly admitted to
himself was most likely, he were drinking, it would be
well for him to go in and report his arrival as soon as
might be. His father would be furious if he were in the
house without his knowledge. John walked back to the
drawing-room, turned the handle of the door, and
entered.</p>

<p>But he went no farther than just beyond the threshold.
There he stopped, for a sickening, hellish two seconds,
while the hyacinth scent rushed in greater volume upon
him, its presence now explained, and while the sight
that met his eyes struck him dazed, as might a club.
It was sickening, bestial, abominable. He fled in a
staggering run, fumbling in dazed haste at the handle
of the door. To blend with the tumult of horrible remembrance
came the sight, just as he reached free air
again, of his father lurching after him, mumbling some
wild words which he could not catch, but whose import
clearly was for him not to go away, but to stay while he
could explain. But John fled.</p>

<p>There was nothing else he could do. Every cell of his
body called for air, air, air. Air to flood away that loathsome
reek of hyacinths; air to flood his brain and blot
away that memory of beastly, drunken nudity; air, air,
air!</p>

<p>At the edge of the pavement stood his one trusty friend,
the Giant Twin, who never would betray him. He leaned
upon the friendly saddle for a second, while his whirling
mind recovered itself to the slight degree possible. Air,
air, air! He flung himself into the saddle, hands going
automatically to ignition and throttle. The engine was
still hot, and broke into its old friendly roar as he thrust
at the kickstarter. Next second he was gone, wheeling
wildly in the road, with the engine bellowing jubilantly
as he forced the throttle wider.</p>

<p>The sunset was spreading over the sky, blood-red and
tawny, as the sun vanished behind the houses, but it was
still stiflingly hot. The air that raced past John’s cheeks
might as well have come straight from a blast-furnace.
It raced past his cheeks, tugged at his hair, filled his
lungs to bursting, and yet it gave no relief. Wider and
wider went the throttle, and now the Giant Twin was
hurtling along the roads as though they were a racetrack.
John did not know where he was going, nor did
he care. Air was what he wanted, air, more air. He sat
well back in the saddle, while the tornado of his own
begetting wrenched at him with a myriad fingers. Yet
as he did so he shuddered at the recollection of the reek
of hyacinth scent. The throttle was wide open now, and
they were swirling round corners at an acute angle amid
a shower of flying grit. Air, more air! John’s hand
moved to a forbidden lever, and the Giant Twin leaped
forward even faster as the exhaust roared in thunder
past the cutout.</p>

<p>It could not last. Not even the Giant Twin, ever loyal,
could hold on those glassy roads at that speed. One last
corner, and then the tyres lost their grip on the hardly
noticeable camber. The Giant Twin leaped madly,
plunging across the road, across the pavement. A cruel
brick wall awaited them, in one rending crash of ruin.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER XI</span></h1></div>

<p>There was misery, misery undisguised and rampant, at
53 Malcolm Road. There were only two people living
there now. Winnie had gone back to school, glad to
escape from her mother’s helpless unhappiness and her
father’s brooding gloom. But Mr Marble and Mrs
Marble were there all the time. The blow of Mr Marble’s
dismissal from the new firm had fallen almost at once. He
did not mind. He did not need the money, and it was
such a terrible trouble to have to go up to the office every
day. Unhappiness or no unhappiness, he preferred being
at home, with his eye on the backyard and his pet
books on crime and medical jurisprudence round him,
to hanging about at the office all day, worrying about
what was happening at home. And the sombre life of
sitting solitary at home began to have a hideous fascination
for him. There was no effort about it, no call for
original thought or talent, and absence of effort was
grateful to a man who habitually drank more than he
should do, and whose mind was continually wandering
down dark avenues, often traversed but always new. His
wife was a nobody now, a phantom less real than the
squint-eyed hangman that so often came tapping him on
the shoulder; she was a soft-footed ghost that wandered
about the house, coping ineffectually with the work that
awaited her, and usually weeping, but so quietly that it
did not disturb him. Sometimes Mrs Marble wept at the
memory of her dead son; sometimes she wept because
her back hurt her. But she wept at other times, too, and
she did not know why she did; actually she was weeping
because her husband had ceased to love her. Very grey,
very frail and very, very unhappy was Mrs Marble at
this time.</p>

<p>It was a strange, mad life that the two of them led
nowadays. There was money in plenty, and very little use
for it. The walls of the sitting-room were by now completely
lined with Mr Marble’s collection of books on
crime; all the other rooms were crowded with massive
and incredibly costly furniture, whose elaborate carvings
were a source of woe to Mrs Marble when she came
to dust them. The tradespeople had left off calling,
nearly all of them, and all the shopping was done by
Mrs Marble in hurried little excursions to the poverty-stricken
shops near. There was money for servants, money
for expensive and delightful foods, money for comfortable
and manageable furniture. But no servant ever
entered 53 Malcolm Road; the elaborate furniture was
Mrs Marble’s most weary burden, and for food they
began to depend more and more upon ready cooked
food bought as each meal came round in turn to augment
the neglected store of the empty larder. Mrs Marble had
begun to neglect her duty of housekeeping long ago.
But she had only begun to show incapacity of this order
since John’s death.</p>

<p>In point of fact, Mrs Marble had an idea, and was
worrying over it. And when Mrs Marble wanted to work
anything out by sheer force of brain-power she was compelled
to abandon all her other labours in order to
devote all her time to the task. She was working something
out slowly, but, as is always the case when mentalities
of that sort are once bent upon completing a
task, very, very surely. Yet even now she could not have
expressed her suspicions in words, so obscure were they.
But they were not connected with Madame Collins,
strange to relate.</p>

<p>Stranger still, it was this latter, dexterous though she
was, who was the cause of the breakdown of the unstable
state of affairs then prevailing. Those sums of money
which she had received from Mr Marble had only
whetted her appetite for more. They had made a wonderful
difference to the bank balance over which she
gloated in private. Yet that bank balance was not nearly
large enough yet for her purpose, increased though it
was by sums wrung from the allowance made by her
husband for housekeeping. Madame Collins took it very
ill that Mrs Marble should continue to stand in the
way of her obtaining more.</p>

<p>For Mrs Marble did. No more would Mr Marble leave
his house unguarded; no more could he be induced to
relax his straining attention over that barren ten square
yards of soil at the back of 53 Malcolm Road. For his
obsession had grown upon him naturally as he gave it
more play. In the days when it had been natural for
him to go up to town every day it had been natural for
his garden to take care of itself, but as soon as he had
got into the comforting habit of watching over it continually
he was unable to break himself of it. So he could
not see her outside of his house, and in the house there
was always his wife.</p>

<p>Madame Collins fretted and fumed. That bank balance
of hers was mounting only by shillings a week when it
ought to be mounting by pounds. She played desperately
hard for fortune. She was as sweet as honey always to
Mrs Marble. Yet it was not easy to gain Mrs Marble’s
good graces. Anxiety about her husband occupied such
of her attention as was not busy working out the problem
she had set herself. And she resented bitterly any
display of sympathy, for that might indicate that the
sympathizer understood her trouble better than she did
herself. Besides, Mrs Marble had been ‘respectably
brought up’, in a world where it was a serious social slur
to have a drunken husband, and any reference to her
husband’s failing had her up in arms at once.</p>

<p>And Madame Collins had indiscreetly—though she
herself had thought at the time that it was a good stroke
of tactics—let it be known that she understood what
was the matter with Mr Marble, to find to her surprise
that Mrs Marble hotly resented her knowledge. To this
cause for dissension must be added the fact that now
that Mrs Marble had admitted to herself her failure to
live the life of a rich woman, and her inability to wear
good clothes as if she had always been accustomed to
them, she had a bitter envy of those who were more
successful. She disliked Madame Collins for her opulence
of figure and good looks, for the way in which she wore
her clothes, for the very clothes she wore. But Mrs
Marble’s dislikes were as unremarkable as everything
else about her, and she was unable to show them except
by a faint and rather bewildered hostility, which Madame
Collins was able to sweep aside. It was more than Mrs
Marble was capable of to be actively rude to anyone.
So Madame Collins continued to call at rather frequent
intervals, to talk in honey-sweet fashion to Mrs Marble,
and sometimes to penetrate into that well-remembered
sitting-room, if Mr Marble was not too fuddled, and to
leave there a haunting scent of hyacinths and a clinging
memory of rich flesh which sometimes penetrated into
Mr Marble’s drink-sodden mind. Generally, however, it
roused little fresh longing in him; he was at the moment
amply content with his books and his drink and the
knowledge that he was guarding that garden.</p>

<p>Mr Marble was rarely quite drunk. He never tried to
be. All he ever attempted was to reach the happy stage—after
the grim preliminary period when his imagination
had been stimulated—when he was unable to think
connectedly, so that he could not work out the long
trains of thought that led inevitably to the picturing
of detection and the scaffold. He could reach this stage
comfortably quite early in the morning before the effects
of the previous day’s drinking had worn off, and then
he was able to keep like it for the rest of the day by the
simple mechanical process of drinking every time he
found his thoughts taking an unpleasant line. The
system was not the result of careful planning; it was
merely the natural consequence of the situation, and for
a long time it worked well enough. Comfortably hazy in
his thoughts, comfortably seated in his armchair by the
sitting-room window, with a new book on his knee to
glance at occasionally—publishers’ announcements were
almost all the post delivered nowadays, and Mr Marble
bought two books on crime a week on the average—Mr
Marble almost enjoyed his life. His wife meant little
to him, save that she was a convenient person to send
out, green string bag in hand, to the grocer’s to buy more
whisky when his reserve dropped below the amount he
had fixed upon—two untouched bottles. Mr Marble ate
little; his wife ate even less; there was little enough work
to keep Mrs Marble employed although she toiled inordinately
hard in helpless fashion to keep the house in
order. Mrs Marble spent her days wandering round the
house soft-footed, slipshod, touching and fumbling and
replacing. Her mind was busy trying to work something
out.</p>

<p>It was through the agency of Madame Collins that she
found the first clue to what she sought. Madame Collins
had called in that evening as was her frequent habit and
Mr Marble had been just a little more sober than usual.
In consequence the evening meal had been spent in the
sitting-room, and supper—a scratch meal, typical of
Mrs Marble—had been served there. When the time
came for Madame Collins to take her departure, Mr
Marble, surprisingly enough, had risen slowly to his feet
with the intention of seeing her home. Mrs Marble raised
no objection; <span class='it'>that</span> was not what she was worrying about—yet.
There had been a brief delay while Mr Marble
was cramming his feet into his boots, soft feet, that for
a week had known no greater restraint than that imposed
by carpet slippers, and then they were gone. Mrs Marble
remained in the sitting-room. Once alone, her old restlessness
reasserted itself. She began to wander round the
room, touching, fumbling, replacing. She was seeking
something, nothing in particular, just something. Really
it was the solution of her problem that she was seeking.</p>

<p>Round the room went Mrs Marble. She gazed for a
space out of the window through which her husband
stared so hard all day long, but it was quite dark outside
and she could see nothing besides her own reflection. She
picked up one or two of the ornaments on the mantelpiece,
and put them back again. She ran her finger along
the backs of the books that stood on the shelves. They
did not interest her. Then she came to the book that
lay on the arm of her husband’s chair, the book he had
been reading in desultory fashion during the day. Mrs
Marble picked it up and ran the pages through her
fingers. It was not an interesting book. She did not even
know what the title—somebody or other’s <span class='it'>Handbook of
Medical Jurisprudence</span>—meant. But at one point the
book fell open of its own accord, and the open pages
were well thumbed, proving that this portion had
received more attention than the rest of the book. It was
in the section on Poisons, and the paragraph was headed
‘Cyanides—Potassium Cyanide, Sodium Cyanide’. A tiny
wrinkle appeared between Mrs Marble’s brows as she
read this. She cast her mind back to that morning many
months ago now, the morning after Medland’s dramatic
arrival. Yes, that was the name on the label of the bottle
she had found displayed on Will’s shelves. Potassium
Cyanide. She went on to read what the book had to
say on the subject.</p>

<p>‘Death is practically instantaneous. The patient utters
a loud cry and falls heavily. There may be some foam
at the lips, and after death the body often retains the
appearance of life, the cheeks being red and the
expression unaltered.’</p>

<p>The wrinkle between Annie Marble’s brows was deeper
now, and her breath was coming faster. She could remember
what she had heard when she was half asleep
the night of Medland’s coming. She had heard Will come
up to the bathroom where his chemicals were kept, and
she had heard him go down again. Then she had heard
that loud cry.</p>

<p>In her next deduction her memory was at fault, but
it was a fault that, curiously enough, confirmed her suspicions.
Annie thought she remembered hearing a heavy
fall at the same time as that loud cry. Of course she had
not done so; young Medland had been sitting in a chair
at the time when Marble said ‘Drink up’, but Annie
was not to know that. Influenced by what she had read,
Annie was quite certain that she had heard that heavy
fall. Now she knew what it was she had heard dragged
through the passage down the stairs to the kitchen. And
she guessed whither it had been taken from the kitchen.
She knew why Will spent all his time watching through
the window to see that the garden was not interfered
with. The problem with which she had been wrestling
for weeks was solved. She felt suddenly weak, and she
sank into the chair. All her other memories, crowding up
now unsummoned, confirmed her solution. She could
remember how there was suddenly more money at their
disposal, and how Will had comported himself the next
morning. She was sure of it all.</p>

<p>As she lay back in the chair, weak and wretched, she
was startled to hear her husband’s key in the door. She
made a spasmodic effort to hide what she was doing,
but she was too weak to achieve anything. Her husband
entered the sitting-room while she still held the book
open in her hand. Her thumb was between the pages,
at the point where there was that interesting description
of the effects of potassium cyanide.</p>

<p>When Mr Marble crossed the threshold, he uttered an
angry exclamation as he saw what Mrs Marble was doing.
He would tolerate no interference with his precious
library. He strode forward to snatch the book out of her
hand. Mrs Marble sat helpless, and made no resistance.
She even held out the book a little to him, offering it
to his grip. But as she did so the book fell open at the
place where she held it, fell open at the passage on the
cyanides.</p>

<p>Mr Marble saw this. He saw the look on her face, too.
He stopped aghast. There was no need for words. In that
brief space of time he realized that his wife knew. That
she <span class='it'>knew</span>.</p>

<p>Neither of them said anything; neither of them was
capable of saying anything in that tense moment. They
eyed each other in poses curiously alike, she with her
hand to her bosom as she peered at him, fluttering, tearful,
and he with his hand, too, over his heart. Just lately
he had not noticed so much the inconvenient tendency
of that organ to beat with such violence, but now it was
impressed upon him again. It thundered in his breast,
depriving him of his strength, so that he had to hold on
to a chair-back to support himself.</p>

<p>Annie gave a little, inarticulate cry. The book fell to
the ground from her hand, and then sobbing, she fled
from the room without again meeting his eye.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER XII</span></h1></div>

<p>There is no solitude like that which one can find in a
London suburb. It is desolate, appalling. The weeks that
passed now found the Marbles lost in this solitude, and
over them, like a constant menace, hung the unvoiced
menace of a secret shared. The days they spent together
in the tawdry rooms downstairs; the nights they spent
together in the vast gilt bed in the front bedroom, but
for all that they were each of them lonely and frightened.
The weight of their secret prevented all conversation
save that about the necessary commonplaces of housekeeping,
and even this they restricted self-consciously to
the uttermost minimum. They did not exchange a dozen
words a day; they said nothing, did nothing; they thought
about nothing save the one dreadful thing about which
they dared not speak. The solitude of the suburbs which
they experienced was theirs from choice; they had cut
themselves off voluntarily from their neighbours, and
the neighbours in turn withdrew from them, sneering to
each other about Mrs Marble’s unhappy new clothes and
the gorgeous furniture that they could see through the
lower windows at Number 53. But this isolation was
hardly new and was easily borne; it was far otherwise
with the spiritual separation that encompassed them each
individually.</p>

<p>They were living together alone in the tiny house; they
were in each other’s society from choice—they each soon
found that they could not bear to have the other for long
out of their sight—but not once in weeks did their eyes
meet. And never, never did they make any comment on
their isolation.</p>

<p>Back into this nightmare world came Winnie, flushed
with triumphs at school. She was undoubtedly beautiful
now, and she was dressed to perfection, as soon as she
had thrown off the shackles imposed by school rules.
Her beauty had won over to her one party at school, and
her almost unlimited pocket-money had won over
another. Eleven months only younger than her dead
brother, she was now just sixteen; a thoroughly good
preliminary education at the secondary school—to which
she looked back with horror, and about which she had
always been discreetly silent—had saved her much
trouble as regards actual school work and had placed her
in the highest form after one term there. Miss Winifred
Marble had the very highest opinion of herself.</p>

<p>She came home in typical fashion. She had given her
parents no exact information of the time of her return,
and she was more or less unexpected when her taxicab
drew up outside Number 53 Malcolm Road. She
descended leisurely to the pavement. Malcolm Road
might indeed be to her mind a horrible hole, but for all
that she was not going to miss one tenth of the sensation
she was aware she was making therein. She could see
hurried heads appearing behind the curtains at all the
houses around, and she allowed the neighbours ample
time to view her mountainous luggage piled on the roof
of the cab, and to admire enviously her smart blue costume.
With a brief order to the driver to bring in her
luggage she marched up the front path and knocked at
the door with a resounding rat-tat-tat.</p>

<p>Indoors her father and mother were sitting together
in the back room, he with a book on his knee as usual,
she gazing into vacancy, following in her vague fashion
all the unpleasant lines of thought that her husband had
followed long ago. At the sound of Winnie’s knocks
Marble rolled a frightened eye upon her. She rose in
heart-fluttering panic.</p>

<p>‘Will,’ she said, ‘it’s not—it’s not—?’</p>

<p>Only police would knock like that at 53 Malcolm
Road. Marble could make no answer for the moment.
The knocking came again. Marble tried with shaking
hands to light himself a cigarette. Come what may, he
must try to look nonchalant, to bear himself calmly, as
did all those men he had read about in his books when
the fatal moment of arrest arrived. But his hands shook
too much. His very lips were trembling, so that the
cigarette quivered like a reed between them. The knocking
was repeated. Then at last Mrs Marble rallied.</p>

<p>‘I’ll go,’ she said, in a weak whisper.</p>

<p>Down the passage she went, soft-footed, ghostlike.
Marble, still fumbling with his cigarette, heard the door
open, after what seemed like ages of waiting. Then he
heard Mrs Marble say: ‘Oh, my dear, it’s you. Oh, dearie——’
and Winnie’s ladylike voice answering her. With
the relief from tension the matches dropped from his
fingers. The cigarette sagged from his mouth. He leant
sideways against the arm of his chair, his eyes staring,
too weak to move, while his heart thudded and fluttered
back to its usual rhythm. That was how they found him,
Winnie and her mother, when they came into the
sitting-room to his expected welcome.</p>

<p>Such was the household to which Winnie returned,
three days before Christmas. The girls at school, who
envied Winnie her trunkfuls of clothes and her ample
pocket-money, had been talking for weeks about what
they intended to do this holiday. There had been talk
of hunting, of dances, of theatres. There had been comparisons
between the food they had at school and the
food they would have at home during this period of
delectable food. And in all this conversation Winnie had
borne a part by no means equal to the part she usually
bore in school conversations. Yet she had called up all
the help of her imagination, and with its aid she had
been able to produce some sort of picture of similar
enjoyment in prospect for herself. That made the disappointment
all the more bitter. The Marble family
lunched that day, the first day of her arrival, on cold ham
and stale bread and butter, and not enough of either.
Her father’s clothes were baggy and spotted, and on his
feet were wrecks of carpet slippers. He drank heavily of
whisky during the meal, and he had obviously been
drinking too much all the time she had been away. Her
mother wore a shabby blouse and skirt, gaping wherever
they could gape, and her stockings were in wrinkles up
her thin calves. Winnie’s eyebrows puckered, and her lips
curled a little as she observed these things.</p>

<p>Then Mrs Marble noticed that Winnie was dissatisfied,
and inevitably she bridled. She knew her housekeeping
was at fault, but she was not going to have her sixteen-year-old
daughter running down her house.</p>

<p>‘Isn’t there anything else to eat?’ asked Winnie, when
the last of the cold ham had disappeared, leaving her
hungrier than when she started, accustomed as she was
to the well-cooked and ample meals of the Berkshire
school.</p>

<p>‘No, there’s not,’ snapped Mrs Marble.</p>

<p>‘But hang it all——’ protested Winnie.</p>

<p>It was hardly the best of starts for a Christmas holiday.
Winnie bore it for two days, and then, on Christmas eve,
she began active operations. Her mother, whom she
approached first, gave her no satisfaction.</p>

<p>‘Oh, don’t worry me,’ she said, with a heat unusual for
her, ‘we’ve got enough to worry us as it is.’</p>

<p>‘But what <span class='it'>have</span> you got to worry you?’ said Winnie,
genuinely bewildered. ‘Worry or no worry, we’ve got
enough money and all that sort of thing, haven’t we?’</p>

<p>Mrs Marble clutched at this straw for a moment, but
she was not adept at deception, and her faint-hearted
statement that all was not well with them financially
died away when she met Winnie’s incredulous gaze.</p>

<p>‘Don’t be silly, mother,’ said Winnie, and Mrs Marble
meekly bowed her head to the storm.</p>

<p>‘No, it’s not money, dear. I’m sure your father gives me
all I want in that way.’</p>

<p>‘How much a week?’ demanded Winnie, relentlessly.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble made a last desperate stand against this
implacable woman who had developed so surprisingly
out of the little daughter she had once been.</p>

<p>‘Never you mind,’ she said. ‘It’s <span class='it'>my</span> business, and this
is <span class='it'>my</span> house, and you’ve no right to interfere.’</p>

<p>Winnie sniffed.</p>

<p>‘No right,’ she said, ‘when you’ve given me cold ham
three times and pressed beef once in two days? Do you
know to-morrow’s Christmas, and I don’t believe you’ve
done anything yet towards it? And look at your clothes!
It’s worse than the last time I came home. I’m sure that
before I went back to school I left you all nicely rigged
out. You had such a nice costumes, and—and——’ This
was a false step, for neither Winnie nor her mother was
yet able to bear a reference to poor dead John, for whom
Mrs Marble had bought mourning with Winnie’s help
last holiday.</p>

<p>‘Be quiet, do,’ said Mrs Marble, with tears in her eyes.</p>

<p>They were not entirely tears of mourning, but they
quelled Winnie effectively. Even she felt a little shy and
embarrassed at sight of her mother crying. So she relaxed
her inquiry, just when a little more pressing would have
forced from her mother the astonishing facts that Mr
Marble was prepared for her to spend ten pounds a week
on her housekeeping while she actually only spent two—hardly
as much as she had spent before they attained
to riches.</p>

<p>But Winnie was at least persistent. After her mother
she approached her father, daring even to break in upon
his whisky-sodden reverie in the drawing-room.</p>

<p>‘Father,’ said Winnie, ‘are we dreadfully poor since you
left off going to the City?’</p>

<p>Mr Marble rolled a maudlin eye upon her. Then pride
reasserted itself—pride in his achievement all those
months ago, which was still mentioned with bated breath
by City clerks, but which had never received its meed of
recognition in his own home.</p>

<p>‘No,’ he said. ‘We’ve got plenty.’</p>

<p>‘That’s good. It’s Christmas to-morrow. I want some
money. Lots of it. Mother hasn’t done anything about it
yet.’</p>

<p>Far back in Mr Marble’s dulled memory ghosts began
to stir. He remembered those times—they seemed ages
ago now—when he wanted his wife to spend money, and
had had all the difficulty in the world to induce her to
do so.</p>

<p>He rolled obediently out of his chair and walked almost
steadily across to the ridiculous gilt bureau in the corner
of the room. He fumbled it open; fumbled out his
cheque-book; fumblingly signed a cheque.</p>

<p>‘Banks shut at half-past three,’ he said. ‘Better be
quick.’</p>

<p>Winnie only had to give a fleeting glance at the cheque.
It was for one hundred pounds.</p>

<p>‘Thank you,’ she said, and before she had left the room
she was calling to her mother to put her hat on.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble had never been so hurried and flurried in
her life before as she was that Christmas eve.</p>

<p>There was the rush to get the bus to Rye Lane. Then
there was the rush to the bank to cash the cheque. Winnie
put the money in her handbag as if she was accustomed
to having a hundred pounds there every day of her life.
Then there was a series of rushes up and down Rye
Lane, crowded with Christmas shoppers, buying everything
which Mrs Marble had omitted to buy, which comprised
a good many necessities as well as the inevitable
luxuries of Christmas. She was almost dropping with unaccustomed
fatigue when Winnie hailed a heaven-sent
taxicab that appeared and piled her and the myriad
parcels they had accumulated into it.</p>

<p>Yet even this did not satisfy Winnie. She was not even
satisfied with bullying her mother next day into cooking
turkey and reheating the ready-made Christmas puddings
they had bought. She was not satisfied with insisting on
having a clean cloth on the table and all the silver displayed
thereon. She was not satisfied with giving presents—bought
with the money obtained yesterday—to her
father and mother, and with showing them what they
had bought for her from the same source. She was not
satisfied with hanging holly and mistletoe all over the
house. Even when Christmas Day was over and her
parents thought they had suffered all they could, she began
to go systematically through the house ‘putting things
straight’. That Berkshire school prided itself on the
domestic training it gave its girls—domestic training on
a scale calculated for women who would not be likely
ever to have dealings with the economics of a house of
thirty pounds a year rateable value into which no servant
or even charwoman was allowed ever to set foot. Winnie’s
ideas were on the grand scale.</p>

<p>She succeeded in upsetting Mrs Marble, and by natural
reaction she upset her father as well. Mr Marble had
been unhappy before, but it was a negative and inactive
unhappiness. He had settled down into a groove, and a
groove, with all its suggestion of permanency, was grateful
to a man in the shadow of the gallows. Any disturbance
of that groove was annoying. He had grown used to
being badly fed, and he never noticed the other details
of household management. He had even ceased long since
from having any pride in his Empire furniture. But
Winnie with her bustle and hustle disturbed him. Without
realizing it, he had taken comfort from his wife’s
inaction, knowing that that meant there was less chance
of her giving away the secret he knew she held in her
bosom. And now Winnie had descended upon them to
alter all this. He did not like it. He liked it still less
when he found that Winnie had her eye upon his drinking
habits and was meditating interfering with them as
well.</p>

<p>But happily Winnie was not of the stuff that carries
things through to the bitter end in face of all opposition.
She was like her father in that she was able to make one
big effort which achieved much but left her incapable of
more for a considerable time. Her activity died down, and
in a brief time she found herself actually acquiescing in
some of Mrs Marble’s shiftless methods of housekeeping.
And in a flash she found that she was incredibly bored.</p>

<p>She had once more got her mother’s wardrobe into
some sort of order, and she had bullied and cajoled her
into wearing the good clothes that were heaped untidily
about her bedroom. By the time she had made her
mother smart again, and had rearranged everything in
accordance with the system that even only two terms
at the school had ingrained into her, Winnie found that
her interest in housekeeping was waning, and that life
at 53 Malcolm Road was decidedly dull.</p>

<p>So she wrote off one or two letters, to friends of hers at
school. It hardly matters what she put into them, whether
it was fact or fiction, whether she wrote about illness—of
course not infectious—at home, or about domestic unhappiness.
Whatever it was she wrote, it achieved its
object. She received very shortly afterwards two invitations
to spend the rest of her holidays with these friends
of hers.</p>

<p>By that time neither Mr nor Mrs Marble was sorry to
see her go. She had caused too much disturbance altogether.
So they said good-bye to her in a philosophic
manner. Mr Marble, partly as a sheer thanksgiving offering,
partly because Winnie took it as a matter of course,
and partly even with a flicker of his old pride that a
daughter of his should be going to stay as a guest at a
house whose sole address was a name and a county,
handed over another cheque. Life had grown so strange
and unreal to them that they saw nothing out of the
ordinary in letting a sixteen-year-old girl go away to stay
with people they did not know, with something nearly
approaching a hundred pounds in her handbag.</p>

<p>After all, Mr Marble’s income was nearly twelve hundred
a year; of that Winnie’s fees amounted to nearly
three hundred, but of the remaining nine he hardly spent
a quarter. A man who has five hundred a year for which
he can find no use does not worry about odd hundreds,
especially when he spends every waking minute in terror
of being hanged.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER XIII</span></h1></div>

<p>The peace that had been so rudely disturbed was only
with difficulty regained. The Marbles found it hard to
settle down once more into the old groove. And no
sooner had they begun to do so than another interruption
to their peace—if their panic-stricken existence can be so
called—occurred, this time at the hands of a more dangerous
person, Madame Collins.</p>

<p>She had come to the limit of her patience. Nearly six
months had elapsed since she had paid into her account
a little roll of bank-notes which might have been traced,
had anyone taken the trouble, to Mr Marble. After that
last terrible occurrence, when that silly boy John had met
with the motor-cycling accident, she had indeed been
content to wait a while, until matters should be quieter
again, but this wait was too long altogether. Dressmaking
in a back street in Dulwich with an automaton of a husband
began to annoy her exceedingly. Anything was
better than that, she decided. Even at Christmas time she
had meditated action, but Winnie had been there when
she called, and Winnie had looked her up and down
with cool insolence and even Marguerite Collins had been
abashed—or, rather, had decided that it would be better
if Winnie were not her enemy. She bided her time awaiting
a more favourable moment.</p>

<p>One morning Mr Marble was alone at home, for Annie
had gone out on one of her all too infrequent shopping
expeditions. She had been gone five minutes only, when
to Marble’s ear came the familiar sound of her hurried,
quiet knock. With an enormous effort—everything was a
great deal of trouble nowadays—he heaved himself out
of his chair and went to the door.</p>

<p>Marguerite Collins was determined to have no nonsense.
As the door opened she stepped inside, and she
was through into the drawing-room and sitting down
before Marble had shut it again. Marble came and stood
before her wearily and dull-wittedly. There was clearly
going to be trouble, and Mr Marble did not feel in the
mood for trouble.</p>

<p>‘Well, what is it?’ asked Marble.</p>

<p>Marguerite did not answer at once. She threw back the
fur from round her neck and drew off her gloves with
slow, deliberate movements. With a gesture she made
much of her round, white throat and her plump hands.
Six months ago this alone would have stirred Marble
into action, but now it left him unmoved. Those six
months had been spent in sluggish over-drinking and in
frothy anxiety. Besides, he had had his will of her, and
Marguerite was not of the type to revive dead passion.
All this Marguerite realized as she watched, keenly but
covertly, his unshaved face and the expressionless blue
eyes. It was as she feared. Well, it would have to be pure
business, then, without the frail disguise of anything else.</p>

<p>‘You are not pleased that I come to see you?’ she asked,
with the lisp and trace of accent that Marble had once
thought so wonderful.</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble, in no mood for tact. As a matter of
fact, he was rapidly growing incapable of thinking about
anything save what lay outside under the soil of the
dreary backyard.</p>

<p>But the monosyllable roused Madame Collins to fury.
It hurt, the more so as she had realized it previously.</p>

<p>‘You are not polite,’ she said, a faint flush appearing
on her soft—over-soft—cheeks.</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble.</p>

<p>‘You admit it! Are you not ashamed? And do you not
remember when you would not have said a thing like
that to me—no, not for worlds?’</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble.</p>

<p>‘No, no, no! Have you nothing else to say to me except
“no”?’</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble. He could hardly be said to be intentionally
rude; but a man whose mind chooses that
particular moment to run off on its favourite track towards
arrest and execution is in no fit state to argue any
point whatever with a hot-tempered woman—especially
when he is in the wrong.</p>

<p>Marguerite Collins bit her lips, and then restrained
herself by a violent effort of will. After all, money—so
said her peasant soul to herself—was sweeter than revenge
at any time, sweet though they both were; if she could
obtain no money, then perhaps she could have the other,
but she would spare no effort to screw more money out
of this weak-minded <span class='it'>rentier</span> first.</p>

<p>She spoke calmly, and she allowed just as much of the
old sweetness to creep into her tone as she thought might
soften Marble towards her.</p>

<p>‘Listen, Will. I am in trouble. I am in great trouble.
My husband—you know what he is, I have told you, oh,
so often—he is unsupportable. I hate him. And now I
think—he hates me also. I must leave him. I must go
away. I shall go back to Normandy, to Rouen. But I
must have money. He has none. No more have I. Will,
dear——’</p>

<p>Marble made one of the greatest mistakes of his life
when he said ‘no’ for the fifth time that morning. The
flush on Marguerite’s cheeks became deeper; she was
scarlet with indignation. It is doubtful why Marble
should have said it; a single one of those unspent hundreds
from his annual income would have ended the
matter for the time. But the refusal slipped out of his
mouth before he was aware of it; he was only trying to
temporize. City caution told him that this was blackmail,
and that it is fatal to yield to a blackmailer; he also
realized at the back of his mind that he most certainly
had not in the house at that moment enough ready
money to satisfy her, and he was not going to give her
a cheque—not he. So he said ‘no’ really meaning ‘yes’,
and had he not been so dull-witted that morning he
would have bitten his tongue out rather than have said it.</p>

<p>Marguerite condescended to use a threat or two.</p>

<p>‘That is a pity,’ she said, ‘for I must have my freedom.
If I were to tell my husband one or two little things—ah,
he would set me free, do you not think so? But it would
cost you much money, more than what I have stooped
to ask you. And your wife, she would not like that to
happen, would she? She does not know at present, eh?
If you would like her to——?’</p>

<p>Marble’s face had turned from pale to flushed and
back again to pallor.</p>

<p>The stab had gone home. Anything rather than let
Annie know. Annie held the key of his life in her hand;
she had guessed his secret, he was sure of it. The knowledge
had troubled him little up to the moment. She
had been a cipher in his life for so long that he had
hardly cared, save that it had made it uncomfortable to
meet her eyes. But if Annie were to know of this! His
drink-dazed mind realized for the first time how desperately
necessary it was that Annie should be kept in a
good humour. The terror in his breast made him lose
control over himself.</p>

<p>‘All right, I’ll pay you,’ he said. ‘How much is it?’</p>

<p>He had cut the ground from under his feet. He had
shown her which was the best course of action; he had
shown her how much he feared Annie’s knowing; by his
earlier refusal and later hurried agreement he had delivered
himself over bound and naked to his enemy.
Marguerite laughed a little, a malicious, throaty laugh.
Then she spoke, mentioning the sum quite as if it were
a matter of course.</p>

<p>‘Three hundred pounds.’</p>

<p>‘I—I can’t afford all that!’</p>

<p>The surprise in Mr Marble’s voice was obvious and
genuine; but Marguerite was quick-witted enough to see
that he really could afford the huge sum.</p>

<p>‘Three hundred pounds,’ she said again.</p>

<p>‘But I haven’t got all that in the house, and a cheque——’</p>

<p>‘It is a cheque that I want,’ said Madame Collins
grimly, and seeing him still hesitate for a moment she
added, ‘And your wife will be back soon, will she not?’</p>

<p>Marble went over to the gilt bureau and wrote out
the cheque.</p>

<p>She was just re-clasping her handbag when they heard
Annie Marble’s key in the door. When she entered the
room Marble was the one that was obviously discomposed.
She herself was honey-sweet as usual, calm and
self-possessed.</p>

<p>‘I have come to say good-bye,’ she said. ‘To-morrow I
go to France.’</p>

<p>‘To France?’</p>

<p>‘Yes, I am going to have a holiday. I am sorry that you
were out when I came for I have so much to do that I
fear I cannot stay. No, no, really I cannot. Good-bye,
dear Mrs Marble. I will send you a postcard from Rouen.’</p>

<p>With that she was gone. It was rather a pity that Mr
Marble should have been so obviously anxious to get
rid of her. Why, she herself was most anxious to be out
of the house too, so that she could hurry and cash that
cheque before Marble could stop it, if by chance he
recovered his spirits enough to do anything like that, but
she showed no signs of it at all. It was perfectly true that
at the time Mrs Marble did not notice her husband’s
nervousness, but little things like that, as time had
already shown, had a way of staying in Mrs Marble’s
memory and re-emerging at inconvenient moments.</p>

<p>After Madame Collins’ departure Mr Marble eyed his
wife anxiously. He had realized now that she was a person
of immense importance to his affairs, and, what was
more, that she was, after all, someone who might, should
it so happen, act independently. He had grown so used
all his life to regarding her as the very reverse of a free
agent, as obedient to himself almost as one of his own
limbs, that the reflection that she might not be so startled
him. There was only one thing, Marble knew, that would
make her break out contrary to his wishes, but that was
the least accountable of all factors. If Annie got to know
that he had been unfaithful to her; if she had it forced
home upon her that his love for her—if ever it had
existed; and it had in her imagination, which was all
that mattered—was dead, then she would be capable of
doing the most unexpected things. She would not
deliberately betray him—not even terror-maddened
Marble thought that—but she might in her consternation
allow something to escape her that would set in action
that swarm of rumours and the resultant investigation
that Mr Marble so dreaded. It was of the first importance
that she should continue to think he loved her. And
the fact that he endowed this circumstance with its full
importance was directly due to Madame Collins. At the
moment he felt almost grateful to the latter for showing
him this. But he eyed his wife anxiously, for all that. It
was an added complication, and the burden of his
troubles was already almost more than he could bear.</p>

<p>And yet perhaps, although Mr Marble did not appreciate
it, this new complication was for the time at least
a blessing in disguise. It took Mr Marble’s mind off the
main point of his troubles, and that was more than anything
else had done during the last year. The situation
reacted upon him in such a way that for twenty-four
hours Mr Marble hardly drank any whisky at all.</p>

<p>But it was one thing to decide to make oneself agreeable
to one’s wife, and quite another to carry it out. Mr
Marble felt positively embarrassed as he eyed his wife
and tried to brace himself for action. He had lived with
her in the closest proximity and yet in the harshest isolation
for a year now; it would be a difficult matter to
break the ice and start afresh. Besides, there lay between
them the shadow of a terrible secret. That might serve
to bind them closer together later on, but at present it
was an obstacle almost insurmountable. Not all that day,
not that night, not the next day did Mr Marble make
much progress.</p>

<p>He made no progress in his own estimation, that is to
say. Thirty-six hours after deciding upon this course of
action Mr Marble still felt almost shy and almost embarrassed
in his wife’s presence. But Mrs Marble had
noticed something. First and foremost, of course, she
noticed that he was not drunk. That was obvious. This
temperance was partly deliberate and partly reflex, dependent
on Mr Marble’s knowledge that it would be as
well to keep his head clear, and to appear as attractive
in his wife’s eyes as possible. But partly it was due to
the fact that, with this new problem to think about, Mr
Marble had no thought to spare for his other troubles,
and, consequently, no need to dull his mind to them.</p>

<p>But Mrs Marble noticed more than his soberness. She
caught him repeatedly looking at her with an anxious
air—the same manner as a courting lover might display.
And he made one or two tentative attempts at conversation
with her too. Seeing that he had said nothing to her
for months save the one or two words that had to be
said this was an enormous difference. He looked at her,
he spoke to her, with a shyness that set her fluttering,
and more than once he opened his mouth as though to
say something to her and then held back at the last
minute, obviously embarrassed. Mrs Marble felt strangely
pleased. After all, dear Will was her whole life, especially
now that John was no longer with her, and, secret or no
secret, this new wooing in this strange shy fashion was
grateful to her and gave her a warm, comforted, feeling.</p>

<p>It was the evening after Madame Collins’ visit that it
really began over again. They were sitting together in the
back room, trying to talk, when Collins himself called.
Mrs Marble brought him in. He was a frail, pale, fair
man, and he looked white and fagged. He sat down on
the chair offered him with a sigh.</p>

<p>‘I’ve come to see if you know anything about my wife,’
he said wearily.</p>

<p>‘What, Marguerite? Why, yes, she was here yesterday.
She said she was just off for a holiday. Where was it she
said she was going to, Will?’</p>

<p>‘Normandy, of course,’ said Marble. He wanted to
appear to know as little as possible about the business.</p>

<p>‘I thought as much,’ sighed Collins.</p>

<p>Neither of the Marbles spoke, and after a moment
Collins went on:</p>

<p>‘She’s gone. I suppose she’s gone for good. I—I don’t
know whether she’s gone alone though.’</p>

<p>‘But didn’t she say where she was going?’ Mrs Marble
was quite irrepressible this evening, as a result of her
husband’s flattering attentions.</p>

<p>‘No. I didn’t know that she was going. She took good
care of that. She has taken everything with her.’</p>

<p>‘Everything?’ Mrs Marble did not understand.</p>

<p>‘Everything. All our savings she’s taken. All her own
things, too. There’s even a bill of sale on the furniture,
I found this morning.’ Collins was resting his forehead
on his hands. ‘She went yesterday,’ he added inconsequently.</p>

<p>The Marbles felt the uselessness of trying to console
him. No word was said for a space. Then Collins stood
up and reached for his hat. He hesitated for a second.</p>

<p>‘I’m sorry to have troubled you,’ he said, weakly. ‘But
I—I just wanted to know.’ Then, in a little spurt of
feeling, he added, ‘It’s hateful to have to ask other people
about my own wife. But—I didn’t want her to go. I
didn’t want her to go.’</p>

<p>He almost broke down, but turned away and began to
stumble to the door. Marble followed him. Halfheartedly,
but in a man-of-the-world tone, he offered his
help.</p>

<p>‘If there’s anything I can do, Collins——’</p>

<p>‘I don’t think there is,’ said Collins, feebly.</p>

<p>‘Money?’</p>

<p>‘No, I won’t want money. It was she who wanted
money.’</p>

<p>Collins was feeling his way blindly, weakly, down the
passage. His shoulders drooped. Clearly he was quite
broken down by the desertion of his wife—much more
than Marble had expected. It became obvious that Marguerite’s
tales of their unhappiness together had been
one-sided.</p>

<p>‘Well, if there <span class='it'>is</span> anything I can do——’ said Marble
again.</p>

<p>It was the inevitable feeble proffer of help, and Collins
declined it once more. Then he went out into the night,
with dragging feet, hardly able to walk. There were tears
in Mrs Marble’s eyes when Marble came back to her in
the sitting-room.</p>

<p>‘Poor man,’ said she.</p>

<p>Marble nodded.</p>

<p>‘And what a hateful woman she must be!’ she went
on. ‘I thought the first time I saw her that she was—well,
you know, like that.’</p>

<p>Mrs Marble had not thought anything of the kind;
but she thought she did, after the event.</p>

<p>‘Poor old Collins seems broken up about it,’ was
Marble’s comment.</p>

<p>‘He must have loved her a lot. Poor chap! And she’s
gone now, and left him alone. Hateful woman!’</p>

<p>The tears were even more imminent in her eyes now,
as she stood by him, and there was a strange surge of
emotion in her breast. Marble looked at her queerly.
Both their hearts were throbbing tumultuously.</p>

<p>‘You wouldn’t do a thing like that, would you?’ said
Marble, his hands playing with her sleeves.</p>

<p>Annie looked up at his face for a second—only a
second.</p>

<p>‘Oh, how could I? Oh, Will, Will, dear.’</p>

<p>There was no more need for words. But as Marble
kissed her—her cheeks were wet, too, by now—he felt a
queer, guilty sensation internally. And yet he meant that
kiss, he really did. Perhaps Judas felt the same once.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER XIV</span></h1></div>

<p>And so, incredible as it might seem, sunshine had come
again for a space to 53 Malcolm Road. The black pall of
terror was lifted, and Annie Marble actually went singing
in her high, cracked voice up and down the stairs
as she did her housework. Not one word had passed
between them concerning the shade of terrible danger
that brooded over them, but now that each knew, and
had shown that they could bear with the knowledge, the
shade did not seem so black. It was a trouble shared,
and a trouble shared <span class='it'>voluntarily</span> is a trouble robbed of
half its weight.</p>

<p>Singing, Annie Marble went up and down the stairs.
Marble, sitting downstairs, could hear her thin voice and
her light step. For the present the voice did not call up a
scowl to his brow; nor did the step seem too stealthy
to be tolerated, as once it did. Whisky had lost its savour
for the time being; there was no pressing need for it to
dull his mind. Most of the time Marble’s mouth was
twisted with a queer smile—and he had not smiled for
months—as he thought of the difference his taking notice
of his wife had made. He was glad of it, too, and now he
could not think of his wife without that smile. He felt
glad and comforted as he thought of her. Her present
high spirits might be pathetic; they might even seem a
trifle ridiculous, but they were, nevertheless, infectious.
Within Mr Marble’s bosom there was a fondness, almost
a fatherly fondness, springing up for the woman who
loved him so well.</p>

<p>And, estimating gains from the most sordid point of
view it was a distinct advantage that he should have in
the house a willing ally upon whom he could rely and
who was possessed of sufficient knowledge of the facts of
the case to help him should emergency arise.</p>

<p>Mr Marble was even able occasionally to throw off his
obsession completely and leave the house—and the garden—to
his wife’s care, while he went forth through the
dingy streets for exercise. The straggling rays of spring
sunshine seemed to warm him, at a time when other
people were hurrying along clasping their heavy coats
to themselves in the bitter cold, and he blinked at the
sunlight gratefully with house-blinded eyes.</p>

<p>As for Annie Marble, she was a changed woman. She
could sing about the house; the housework seemed nothing
to her nowadays, so comforting was the knowledge
that darling Will was downstairs thinking about her;
she routed out from some neglected kitchen shelf a
stained copy of Mrs Beeton—a wedding gift, unlooked
at since she first had two children on her hands, sixteen
years ago—and laboured joyously, though rarely successfully,
compounding new delicacies for her beloved lord.
For now there was no pinch for money, and Annie had
found sixteen years ago that if one wanted to cook in
the style of Mrs Beeton there was a great need of money.
And the will had to be there, too. So the evenings often
found her sitting laboriously composing notes to the big
stores ordering all sorts of strange things, things which she
had never thought of ordering before, bottled oysters,
asparagus, <span class='it'>foie gras</span>, queer lists for which Mr Marble
signed the cheques without a murmur. He felt that at
last he was beginning to have some benefit from the
money he had won at such risk during his slavery at the
Bank. It was the first time.</p>

<p>And Mrs Marble’s personal expenses, too, began to
show a healthy increase. She did not venture up to Bond
Street again, that was asking too much of her; she could
not face the immense superiority of the young ladies in
those shops; even High Street, Kensington, was a little
above her head, but in Rye Lane she was exceedingly
happy. The shops therein arrogantly called it ‘the Regent
Street of South London’ in their advertisements, and they
did their level best to live up to the boast. Mrs Marble’s
frail little figure and her witless face, made almost pretty
by reason of her happiness, became well known there.
She would flit around the big shops, ordering here, trying
on there, with in her manner a little trace of apology
for troubling the assistants, for all her money. For her it
was one of the very keenest of enjoyments, so keen that
it almost hurt, to buy things, anything she liked, without
having to think about the cost. But always she would
stop in the middle of her shopping and hurry anxiously
to catch a bus to get home in case her darling Will was
growing anxious about her.</p>

<p>Yet this happiness, this moment of peace, was only a
lull in the storm. They were both conscious of this,
although they never admitted it even to themselves. And
because they would not admit it they were still handicapped
in their relations with each other. Annie found
this one morning when she came home from Rye Lane
and found Marble sitting spiritlessly in his chair in the
sitting-room, in almost the same way as he had sat in the
dark days gone by. There was a cloud on his brow; she
could tell that at once. But she tried to act naturally.
She came fluttering up to him with all her parcels,
dropped the latter carelessly on the table, and bent over
and kissed him lightly, spontaneously—a trick she had
never mastered before, not even in the honeymoon days.</p>

<p>‘I’ve got back, you see,’ said she. It was just the sort
of thing one would expect her to say, and because of this
it ought to have called up an instant smile; it would have
done so yesterday.</p>

<p>But to-day there was no smile. Marble’s set, dull look
frightened her, it was so like the look he had worn in
the bad time. A little shudder ran through her, as she
realized that it was calling up within her the same sensations,
as though they were echoes, that she had known
during the same period. A light had gone out in the
world.</p>

<p>‘What’s the matter, dear?’ she said. ‘Aren’t you—aren’t
you well?’ that was all she could say, because of the
barrier still between them. She could not very well say:
‘Is your conscience troubling you?’ or ‘Are you still afraid
of detection?’</p>

<p>And Marble could only answer dully, ‘Oh, I’m all
right,’ and put her aside rather abashed and frightened.
He could not tell her that what he had foreseen had
happened; that by the second post, happily after she had
gone out, there had arrived a letter from Rouen, a cruel,
bitter letter, delicately phrased and worded, apparently
telling him of the writer’s unbounded affection for him,
but really only a sneering demand for money—more
money. The actual cash did not matter so much; Marble
had enough and to spare to keep even Marguerite Collins
quiet. No, it was not the money. It was—although he did
not allow himself to believe it—the fact that the letter
had brought back into his life what had been for a
moment absent—the sense of hideous insecurity, the
knowledge that the future was laden with all sorts of
ghastly possibilities, and had once more set his mind
running on the things that might happen. Marble started
drinking heavily again that day. He could hardly be
blamed for so doing.</p>

<p>Yet for all that he roused himself the next morning
sufficiently to go into town; he cashed a cheque, and
with the money he went into an exchange bureau, and
bought many dirty hundred franc notes, which he put
into a registered envelope and despatched it to Rouen.</p>

<p>It was in this fashion that the old atmosphere redeveloped
at 53 Malcolm Road. It grew slowly, and the
young friendship died hard, but the one grew and the
other died, inevitably, infallibly. And the passionate love
that Annie bore to Marble, the love that he had roused,
was beaten down and trampled underfoot. Passion she
had known before, in a vague sort of way, when they
had first been married, and love she had always borne
him, but the new love, this splendid brilliant thing that
had just come into her life, borne of trouble shared with
him, and which for this space had illuminated her whole
being, was changed to poison and bitterness. It was bad
for both of them.</p>

<p>The effect was not yet well marked by the time Easter
came, bringing back Winnie from school. She had
changed, just as she had changed during the other two
terms. She was taller—she nearly overtopped her father
now—and she was more beautiful than ever. Her manner
had changed, too. She had gained in assurance—it
might be better put as insolence—and her voice had
gained in its marked throaty quality. Her complexion
was wonderful and her figure was marvellous. Her upper
lip was short and her eyelids drooping, and she carried
herself with an easy erectness that accentuated the arrogance
of her manner.</p>

<p>She was head girl of the school now, thanks to a
capacity for producing good results in examinations without
doing much work beforehand, and thanks also to
an unexpected flair for lacrosse and for tennis; she was
not the sort of girl to stand any nonsense from old-fashioned
parents, not by a long chalk.</p>

<p>At first things did not go too badly. Matters had not
declined very much from the old standard of perfection
that they had reached during the good time that had just
ended. Winnie’s drooping lids lifted a trifle in surprise
the first lunchtime, when she saw the spotless white
cloth and the bright silver, and was given a lunch not
very inferior either in quality or quantity to that she was
given at school.</p>

<p>But the brief spell of intimacy her parents had enjoyed
had left an unfortunate legacy behind it. They could
quarrel now, which was more than they had been able
to do before, and they rather took advantage of it. The
disappointment of the decline of their happiness rasped
their nerves, and they displayed a distressing tendency to
snap at one another which Winnie deprecated. It was
rank bad form for husband and wife to quarrel in public.
Winnie considered that her presence was sufficient to
make the quarrels take place ‘in public’.</p>

<p>Behind the wrinkle in Winnie’s brow many things
were slowly developing. She liked to think of herself as
cold-blooded and calculating. Calculating she may have
been; cold-blooded she certainly was not. She could weigh
up chances, and make a plan of campaign, but she never
chose the cautious plan indicated by those chances.
Winnie’s cold-bloodedness amounted to an ability to see
the folly of recklessness combined with an inability to
avoid being reckless.</p>

<p>First of all she was cautious. She refitted her wardrobe
to the fullest extent she could possibly contrive; her
father paid the bills without a murmur. He still could
take delight in the fact that his daughter was at school
with two Honourables—daughters of a profiteering war
peer—and that during the last holidays she had met
several other titled people to speak to. He did not object
in the least to paying for her clothes under these circumstances.</p>

<p>Even while Winnie was studying spring fashions she
found herself smiling wryly with relief that her parents
had this queer fad for living in a poky house in a poky
suburb. If they had launched out a bit when they had
made their money, as once she had wanted them to,
there would not be all this loose cash to throw about.
Twelve hundred a year was not much; if they had a big
house and a motor-car her father would certainly not
be able to pay three hundred a year for her school expenses,
nor these big sums for her clothes, and as for
the cheque she had just wheedled out of him—well, he
would have thought more than twice about giving her
that!</p>

<p>Winnie was acutely aware of the atmosphere of insecurity
that hung like a fog about 53 Malcolm Road; of
its true cause she was, of course, ignorant, but she
appreciated it sufficiently to do her best to make hay
while the sun still shone. She had plenty of clothes, and
she had a monstrous sum in her handbag—an amount
undreamed of by her schoolfellows and most certainly
unknown to her schoolmistresses. For all the fact that
it was a school for profiteers’ daughters there would have
been a huge commotion if it had got about that Winnie
Marble habitually carried over a hundred pounds, a
bulky roll of five and ten-pound notes with her. But
Winnie was cautious so far; she took pains that it did <span class='it'>not</span>
get about. Money was always useful; and at the back of
Winnie’s mind there was a half-formed plan, in carrying
out which she would find it more than useful, she
expected.</p>

<p>Last holiday had been most successful. The girl she
had stayed with had, of course, been only a girl, and the
other guests who came at odd intervals had hardly noticed
her. But they noticed Winnie all right. It would have
been hard not to. Winnie, to the annoyance of her hostess
and the chagrin of the daughter of the house, had climbed
into the position of full guest; she attained brevet
woman’s rank and clung to it like a leech. The other
women had turned up their noses; the men had grinned
and played up to her. And two of the men were likely to
be useful to Winnie if ever she decided to act on that
half-formed plan. They were powers in the world of
musical comedy—maybe because they, too, were war
profiteers. But for all that it was a little inconvenient
that she was not to be asked to that house again. She
would be glad to have somewhere to go this holiday.</p>

<p>If she had, the storm might perhaps have been averted;
perhaps everything might have been different. As it was,
the eventual catastrophe was impossible to avoid.</p>

<p>It began in quite a small way, the way these things do.</p>

<p>‘Oh, mother,’ said Winnie, ‘you’re never going out in
that hat?’</p>

<p>‘Why not?’ asked Mrs Marble. She had never liked
the way Winnie had dismissed, with a bare word, all the
fine clothes she had been buying.</p>

<p>‘It’s too awful for words. That red and that blue——’</p>

<p>It was unfortunate that she should have said that. The
hat was one whose trimming Mrs Marble had altered
herself, and she was proud of the result.</p>

<p>‘I think it’s very nice,’ said Mrs Marble.</p>

<p>‘Oh, it’s not, mother. Those colours swear at each other
most frightfully. Oh, dear, and your coat’s all wrinkled
at the back. Why don’t you learn to put your clothes
on properly?’</p>

<p>‘I <span class='it'>do</span> put them on properly. I put them on better than
you do. <span class='it'>I</span> don’t look fast.’</p>

<p>The last words slipped out almost without Mrs Marble
being aware of them. She felt sore and irritable, and it
had been a tradition in her family when she was a little
girl that everyone who had the self-assured manner and
polished appearance that Winnie affected was ‘fast’.</p>

<p>Winnie did not mind being called fast by her mother.
She only deigned to reply with a rather unladylike snort.
But the word attracted her father’s attention, and he
looked up sharply. He was irritable, too.</p>

<p>‘Don’t talk to your mother like that, Winnie,’ he said.</p>

<p>‘Don’t interfere,’ snapped Winnie.</p>

<p>She gave a last wrench at the wrinkled coat; but she
was cross, and the coat was a hopeless misfit, anyway.
Mrs Marble staggered at the wrench. Winnie had meant
nothing by it, but it brought Mr Marble to his feet.</p>

<p>‘Be careful, my girl,’ he said.</p>

<p>It was that ‘my girl’ which settled the matter. It was
a horridly vulgar expression, and it took Winnie straight
back to those dark days before she had ever gone to
school in Berkshire. She turned and looked at her father,
looked him up and down, and as she could find nothing
to say she did something far more effective than any
speech would have been. She turned away without a word
spoken, her upper lip a little curled—not much, that was
the annoying part; it implied that her father was not
worth being <span class='it'>too</span> contemptuous about—and her best
young ladyish expression on her face. It was more than
flesh and blood could stand, especially flesh and blood
that had been moistened by just not enough whisky for
the last few days.</p>

<p>Marble caught her by the shoulder and swung her
round again.</p>

<p>‘One word from you, my girl,’ he said, ‘and you’ll be
sorry. You’re not grown up yet, you know.’</p>

<p>‘Aren’t I?’ said Winnie, ‘Aren’t I? I’ll show you that
I am in a minute, if you’re not careful. Bah!’ she added,
manners clean forgotten, ‘you and your silly old house,
and your silly old furniture, and your silly old clothes.
Just look at you both.’</p>

<p>She looked them up and down again, both of them,
this time. It was here that Mrs Marble should have played
the peacemaker. It was her last opportunity, and she
might have flung herself between her husband and
her daughter. But she was too cross; partly because she
knew that Winnie’s sneer at the furniture would have
hit her husband in a tender spot.</p>

<p>‘Oh, you wicked girl,’ she said. ‘How dare you speak
to us like that? You ought to be grateful to us for all
we’ve done for you.’</p>

<p>Winnie could think of nothing better to say than
‘Ought I?’ but it was quite enough for her to say. It was
the manner, and not the matter, that told. Winnie was
too superior altogether, and that throaty accent of hers
irritated her parents past all bearing. It reminded her
father too painfully of the days when he had been a
slave in a bank, and it forced home upon her mother the
knowledge that her criticism of her clothes had been sincere,
and it gave her an uncomfortable feeling that
Winnie knew what she was talking about. It was Mrs
Marble that found speech first.</p>

<p>‘Yes, you did ought,’ she said. ‘You owe us the clothes
on your back, and all that fine schooling you’ve had, and—and
everything else. So there!’</p>

<p>Winnie had lost her temper thoroughly by now.</p>

<p>‘I do, do I?’ she said. ‘Well, I shan’t owe you anything
else, so there! I’ll go away now, this minute, if you’re
not careful. I will, I tell you.’</p>

<p>She may have thought that this threat would be sure
of silencing them, and making them sorry for what they
had said; but she had left out of her reckoning the
temper they were in, and the fact that they might not
take her literally. Nor was she to know that there was
one member in the house who might not be too sorry
if she were to carry out her threat—someone who found
it very worrying to have to guard his own backyard from
his own daughter.</p>

<p>‘Poo!’ said Mr Marble.</p>

<p>‘I will, I tell you. I will. Oh——’ And then Winnie
stamped her foot at them as they stood there and turned
and fled upstairs to her own room. Downstairs they heard
the key turn in the lock.</p>

<p>‘Oh dear, oh dear,’ said Mrs Marble, now that it was
over. ‘I’ll go up to her, shall I?’</p>

<p>‘No,’ said Marble, ‘she’s only gone to have a good
cry. Didn’t you hear her lock her door?’</p>

<p>But Winnie was not having a good cry. She had made
her decision in red-hot mood, with a precipitation after
her calm deliberation that was characteristic of her. She
dragged out her trunks from under her bed and began
to pile her clothes into them feverishly. It was all done
before she had time to think.</p>

<p>Then she washed her face in cold water and re-powdered
carefully. Now that her mind was made up
there was nothing that could change it. She put on her
hat, her very nicest hat, before the mirror, and walked
downstairs again. Before her mother could come out
into the hall to make her peace she had gone out, with
the front door slamming behind her.</p>

<p>‘Gone for a walk,’ was Marble’s terse explanation when
his wife tearfully reported this to him. ‘Gone for a walk
to get over it. She’ll come back soon as right as rain.’</p>

<p>She was back sooner than they expected, however, and
she came back in a cab. They heard her key in the door,
and a moment afterwards they heard her directing the
cab-driver upstairs to where her trunks lay. As the true
import of this came home to her Mrs Marble hurried
into the hall, wringing her hands.</p>

<p>‘Winnie, Winnie,’ she wailed. ‘We didn’t mean it,
really we didn’t. Winnie, dear, don’t go like this. Will,
tell her she mustn’t.’</p>

<p>But Mr Marble was silent. Winnie had come into the
sitting-room to them, defiance in her eyes. They could
hear the laboured steps of the cab-driver bringing down
the first trunk.</p>

<p>‘Will, tell her she mustn’t,’ said Mrs Marble again.</p>

<p>But Mr Marble still said nothing. He was drumming
with his fingers upon the arm of his chair. He was thinking,
as hard as his confused mind and the tumult of his
thoughts would allow. There was absolutely no denying
the fact that it would be more convenient to have Winnie
out of the house. One never knew, never. All the books
said that it was the little things that gave one away, and
the fewer people there were about to notice such things
the better. Perhaps Mr Marble would not have considered
this in connexion with Winnie, but during that quarrel
there was something that forced it upon him. Once more
it was that dread family likeness. Winnie had looked
rather like John, that time when he had come blundering
into the sitting-room; and she had looked rather like
young Medland, too. It had shaken him badly.</p>

<p>The heavy steps of the cab-driver were heard re-descending
the stairs. They paused outside the door, and
he coughed apologetically.</p>

<p>‘Two trunks and a ’atbox, mum. Is that right?’</p>

<p>‘Quite right,’ said Winnie, in her throatiest, most
musical voice.</p>

<p>And still Mr Marble said nothing.</p>

<p>‘Good-bye,’ said Winnie. The throatiness disappeared
like magic; there was a little break in her voice. It would
have taken very little to have diverted her from her
purpose.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble looked at her husband; waited for him to
speak. All she could do was to wring her hands and
choke in her breathing. Still Mr Marble did not speak.
Winnie could bear it no longer. She swung round on her
heel and ran out of the room, down the hall and out
to the waiting cab.</p>

<p>‘Charing Cross,’ she said to the driver, huskily.</p>

<p>Mrs Marble only reached the gate when they were fifty
yards away—beyond recall.</p>

<p>It was all very stupid and silly, and afterwards it
seemed as if it might have been avoided—but it really
might not.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER XV</span></h1></div>

<p>And now began the darkest period in all Annie Marble’s
unhappy life, the last few weeks before its unhappy end.
The shadows had massed about 53 Malcolm Road, and
as they clustered round ready for the last act of the
tragedy poor Annie grew more and more conscious of
their presence.</p>

<p>Winnie was gone; of that they could be sure now. They
had waited a week in suspense; then they had begun to
advertise for her. Discreet little advertisements in the
personal columns of the papers—‘Winnie. Come back
to 53. Everything forgiven. Father and Mother.’ That was
the most they could do. For a brief half-second while
they had been debating what to do there had arisen a
hint that they might call in the police, but it vanished
at once like a breath of cold air, leaving them looking
dumbly at each other without meeting each other’s eyes.</p>

<p>Poor Annie spent anxious hours wondering what had
happened to her daughter. There was only one thing
that she thought possible, and that was that she was
leading ‘a life of shame’ with one or other of the finely-dressed
men she knew. At this late period Annie remembered
the flocks of men who had hovered—and more
than hovered—about them during those days at the
Grand Pavilion Hotel. She was sure that it was this that
had happened. Neither she nor her husband knew that
Winnie had had all that money with her when she left;
nor, thinking the worst as they inevitably did, did they
give her credit for her coolness of head that she could
summon to her aid if necessary. Annie Marble thought
she had driven her daughter into prostitution. It was the
bitterest drop she had to swallow.</p>

<p>It was spring, and drifting through the air came the
plague. Perhaps it was the self-same plague that had
swept across England during the last years of the reign
of Edward III; certainly the same plague that had killed
its thousands in war-torn France in 1814, and claimed the
life of an empress; the same plague that had decimated
Europe the last spring of the war, taking more victims
than had the war itself; the same plague that, sometimes
virulent, sometimes almost negligible, had shown itself
every spring since. The disease at which some people still
scoff, but which is, nevertheless, deadly: influenza.</p>

<p>It was in the air, and seeking victims. Those who
troubled too little about their health; those who were
for the moment out of sorts; those who were depressed,
or worn with anxiety—they were the victims the plague
sought.</p>

<p>And Annie Marble was depressed and worn with
anxiety. She was fretting about Winnie, and this was the
last straw added to the intolerable burden under which
she laboured. Will had returned almost entirely to his
old ways; once again he passed his time in the sitting-room,
peering drearily through the windows into the
backyard. The whisky bottle was continually at his side;
the words he had for his wife grew fewer and fewer.
Sometimes he could still rouse himself sufficiently to
pay her a little attention, and bring a flash of sunshine
into her life, but the occasions were rare. Poor Annie!</p>

<p>Then one morning Annie was not well. She had a
headache, and she was thirsty. At first she was able to let
it pass unheeded; it would go away during the morning,
she thought, or at least it would be gone by to-morrow.
So she began her day’s work, but when it was half completed
she felt that she had to sit and rest for a space.
The rest seemed to do her good, and she thought to
complete the cure by going out to do her shopping. She
put on her coat and hat, but even as she went downstairs
dizziness came over her and she was forced to acknowledge
herself beaten. With an effort of will she went into
the sitting-room, where her husband was staring gloomily
through the panes.</p>

<p>‘Will,’ she said, collapsing into a chair, ‘I don’t feel
very well.’</p>

<p>That roused her husband a little, to ask what he could
do, and what was the matter. It ended in Mr Marble
going forth to do the shopping, leaving her to rest. It
was tacitly understood between them, before he left her,
that she was to rest in the sitting-room, whence she could
keep an eye through the windows.</p>

<p>And the next day Annie felt worse than ever. But even
in her illness she found something to comfort her. Marble
was a little alarmed, and he showed it in the concern he
evinced about her. He asked how she was very gently, and
he tried to minister to her in a clumsy man’s fashion.
Poor Annie was quite fluttered and pleased, despite her
sickness, by the attention he paid her. As he guided her
to a chair and propped her back with cushions where it
hurt, and asked what else he could do, she was almost
glad she was ill. For she had refused to stay in bed. That
was like her. If she could stand, she would get out of bed.
And she could not only stand, but she could walk, when
her dizziness permitted it. She was in a high fever, but
to that she did not pay much attention. But she agreed,
nevertheless, that it might perhaps be advisable that Will
should do the shopping that day. He even volunteered
that he should, and sallied out, shopping basket in hand,
and a little list of things that were needed. He had forgotten
one or two items the day before.</p>

<p>While he was gone, Annie sat in the drawing-room.
Her mouth was dry, and there was an unpleasant taste
in it, and her head felt queer, and there was a strange
sort of doubtfulness about things when she looked at
them. There were pains in her body and joints, too. But,
for all that, she still felt the joy of her husband’s loving
attention.</p>

<p>But Will had hardly gone when the postman dropped
a letter through the door with his double knock. It was
the eleven o’clock postman—he who brought the continental
mail. Annie walked weakly to the door and
picked up the letter, and went back weakly to the drawing-room.
Not until she had sat down did she look at
the envelope—she was not sure enough of her legs to
read it standing up. But she was very interested as to what
it might be. For perhaps it might be news of Winnie.</p>

<p>The envelope was addressed most queerly. The writing
was large and sprawling. The first letter of the address
was a big ‘A’. The second was an ‘M’. The third was a
‘W’. The letter was obviously from foreign parts, for the
address ended ‘Angleterre’ and Annie knew that meant
‘England’ in a foreign tongue. Thus——</p>


          <div class='poetry-container' style=''>
          <div class='lgp'> <!-- rend=';' -->
<div class='stanza-outer'>
<p class='line0'><span class='it'>A. M. W. Marble</span>,</p>
<p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;<span class='it'>53 Malcolm Road</span>,</p>
<p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;<span class='it'>Dulwich</span>,</p>
<p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;<span class='it'>Londres</span>,</p>
<p class='line0'>&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;<span class='it'>Angleterre</span>.</p>
</div>
</div></div> <!-- end poetry block --><!-- end rend -->

<p>Annie looked at the envelope a long time. Clearly the
‘A’ and the ‘M’ referred to her—was she not Ann Mary
Marble? The ‘W’ and the absence of any ‘Mrs’ bothered
her. But it might be usual in letters from abroad to leave
out the ‘Mrs’ and being from abroad it might contain
news about Winnie just as much as if it had been posted
in England. Annie opened it, and took out the letter.
It took several seconds for the import of the first few
words to pierce home to her, but as soon as she had
grasped their meaning she sank back half fainting in her
chair. The letter was in English, and it began ‘My dearest,
darling Will’.</p>

<p>Recovering herself, Annie read the remainder of the
letter. She could not understand some of it—the cruel
satire of it was beyond her, dulled as her mind was by
her fever, and what she did understand left her heartbroken.
All through the letter the writer addressed Will
in terms of the most flamboyant affection; it made some
reference which she did not understand to her, Annie,
and it ended by asking for money—‘The same as you
sent me before, darling’.</p>

<p>Annie sat still, the letter crumpled up in her hand.
There was no address on the letter, and the signature
was rather illegible and consisted of a French word. But
she knew from whom the letter came. It might have been
instinct, or it might have been recognition of the style,
but she knew. The tears which might have helped her
were denied her by the fever. All she could do was to
sit and think distortedly over everything. So Will did
not love her, after all her dreams and hopes. Instead, he
was writing to this Frenchwoman, and sending her
money. All this tenderness of his, and the passion he
had shown a little while back—just after <span class='it'>she</span> had gone,
Annie realized with a sob in her throat—were mere pretences.
With strange prescience she guessed that it was
to keep her in a good temper when he found that she knew
about his secret. A half-formed resolution rose in the
maelstrom of her thoughts that she would betray him at
the first opportunity, but she put it aside unconsidered.
She loved him too much. Her heart was broken, and she
was very, very unhappy.</p>

<p>She sat there alone, for what seemed like hours.</p>

<p>Later came Marble, but she roused herself at the sound
of the key in the door sufficiently to thrust the letter
into the bosom of her dress, and when he came to ask
how she was she managed to gasp out ‘I think I’m ill.
Oh——’ Then she fell forward in the chair. She <span class='it'>was</span> ill,
very ill. Marble helped her up to bed, to the big gilt
bed where the cupids climbed eternally, with its lavish
canopy-rail and bulging ornament. But when she had
recovered sufficiently to undress she thrust the letter into
her little private drawer before calling to him in her
cracked, fevered voice for his help.</p>

<p>Next day she was worse. Marble bent over her
anxiously as she lay there in the gaudy bed. She tossed
about, from side to side, and she hardly knew him. There
were only those two in the house, and he was worried.
Worried to death. Of sick nursing he knew nothing.
There was not even a clinical thermometer in the house.
If she were to die—! But he refused to consider her
dying. There would be one fewer in the secret, it is true,
but the disadvantages would be overwhelming. And there
would be questions asked if she were to die without receiving
medical attention. Come what might, he must
fetch a doctor. He must bring a stranger into his house,
the house that he guarded so urgently. There was no help
for it, no help for it at all. He saw that she had all his
intelligence could suggest that she might want, and then
slipped away quietly downstairs and out to where the
nearest brass plate hung at a gate. A white-capped maid-servant
took his message and told him that the doctor
would be round shortly.</p>

<p>Dr Atkinson was a thin rat of a man, with sandy hair
and eyebrows, neither young nor old, with a keen glance
behind his pince-nez. He felt her pulse, took her temperature;
he noticed her troubled breathing and the way she
tossed and turned in the bed. She was nearly delirious:
indeed, her speech was confused, and twice she muttered
something that he just did not catch. He turned and
looked keenly at Marble.</p>

<p>‘Who’s looking after her?’ he asked.</p>

<p>‘I am,’ said Marble—a trifle sullenly, Atkinson thought,
later.</p>

<p>‘Are you alone?’</p>

<p>‘Yes. My daughter’s—away at present.’</p>

<p>‘Well, you’d better get somebody in. Some neighbour
or somebody. She’ll need careful attention if we’re to
avoid pneumonia.’</p>

<p>Marble looked at him blankly. Get somebody in? Have
someone else in the house, poking and prying about?
And Annie, there, nearly delirious! Marble had caught
a word or two of what she had muttered, of what Atkinson
had not heard, and it set him trembling.</p>

<p>Atkinson was looking round the room, with its queer
furnishing of gilt. He was trying to estimate the income
of this man who apparently did not go to work.</p>

<p>‘What about a nurse?’ he said. ‘I’ll send one in, shall I?’</p>

<p>Marble found his tongue.</p>

<p>‘No,’ he said, with overmuch vehemence—he was sadly
overtried. ‘I won’t have a nurse. I can do all the nursing
myself. I won’t have a nurse.’</p>

<p>Atkinson shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>‘Well, if you won’t, you won’t. But she’ll need very
careful nursing, I tell you that. You must——’ he went
on to outline all that Marble must do. But all the time he
was debating within himself over this strange man who
lived alone with his wife in a poky house furnished like
Buckingham Palace, whose daughter was—away, at
present, who did no work, and who was violently opposed
to having anyone nurse his wife.</p>

<p>And Marble guessed at his curiosity, and cursed at it
within himself, with the sweat running cold under his
clothes.</p>

<p>‘Right, I’ll look in again this afternoon,’ said Atkinson.</p>

<p>He did. He looked in again twice a day during all the
next week.</p>

<p>And during that week Marble fretted and wore himself
to pieces under the burden of his troubles. Everything
was madly worrying. Atkinson alone, with his sharp eyes
everywhere, was enough to madden him, yet to add to
it all the great worry of his life returned to him and
nagged at him more than ever he had known it before.
Marble found his harassed mind returning continually
to work out hateful possibilities; whether or no Atkinson
might find something out; whether he had heard anything
of what Annie was continually muttering; what the
neighbours, as well as Atkinson, thought of his refusing
to call in the assistance of anyone else. He knew that they
were all interested in what went on in his house, he
knew how they sneered enviously at all his fine possessions,
and at Annie’s clothes and Winnie’s grand
manner—and they were probably burningly interested
in what had happened to Winnie, though by good luck
they might think she was still at school.</p>

<p>Annie herself worried him, too. She was a ‘difficult’
patient. She would hardly speak to him, and would turn
from him in horror on those occasions when she was
most nearly delirious. She needed a great deal of attention.
Marble had to struggle to do invalid cookery for
her—he, who had never so much as touched a saucepan
in his life. He had to do it well, too, for that brute
Atkinson was continually coming in, and more than once
he demanded to see and taste the concoctions he had
prepared for her. Marble struggled along with Mrs
Beeton, the same Mrs Beeton as Annie had lingered over
for his sake, and attended to the tradesmen who once
more came calling—Marble had to allow that; Atkinson
was too sharp for him to attempt to do the shopping and
leave his patient. Rushing from the kitchen to the door,
and from the door to the bedroom, whenever Annie rang
the handbell that stood by the bed, and from the bedroom
back to the kitchen, Marble wore himself out. It
was rare that even two attempts brought success to his
unskilful cookery; he seemed to be cooking all the time.</p>

<p>And as a crowning worry came the fear that he would
be taken ill, too. In that case Atkinson, the interfering
busybody, would step in and have them taken away to
hospital. If he were delirious like Annie! He shuddered
at the thought. So it was wildly necessary that he should
retain his health. Marble had never worried about his
health before, but now he paid for it in full. He took his
temperature every few minutes, he studied his body
attentively, and he stopped drinking the whisky for which
his nerves shrieked.</p>

<p>The strain told on him. The worrying days and the
broken nights—for he had to attend to Annie frequently
during the nights—broke his already strained nerves to
pieces. And he could not forget about the garden. That
was continuously in his thoughts, too. If anything, it was
worse now. Marble found himself, whenever the jangle
of Annie’s bell roused him out of his sleep, and after he
had done what she wanted, creeping downstairs to peer
out into the dark garden to see that all was secure. He
even began to wake on his own during the night and go
down, and he had never done that before.</p>

<p>Strange to tell, Annie recovered. It was more really
than Atkinson expected, and it seems stranger still when
it is remembered that she did not want to recover. For
she did not. Annie wanted to die.</p>

<p>But she recovered. The fever left her, very thin, very
pale, with the shining pallor of the invalid, and she was
able to leave off the pneumonia jacket that Marble had
hurriedly contrived, and sit up in bed dressed in one
of her opulent, overlaced nightdresses and a dressing-jacket
and boudoir cap. Atkinson told Marble that she
was not yet quite out of danger. There was always a risk
after a bad attack of influenza. There might be grave
heart trouble, or even now pneumonia might intervene
if she were to get up too soon.</p>

<p>‘But, of course,’ said Atkinson, ‘there’s not much chance
of her getting up for a bit yet. She’s too weak to stand
at present.’</p>

<p>Annie lay in bed, thinking. She was thinking with the
clearness of thought, harsh and raw as a winter’s morning,
that comes after a period of high fever. Over her brooded
the dreadful depression following influenza, the poisonous
depression which darkens the most hopeful outlook.
And Annie’s outlook was anything but hopeful. Downstairs
she could hear her husband moving about on one
of his endless household tasks, and her lips writhed at
the thought of him. She did not hate him, she could not
hate him, even now. But she felt she hated herself. And
she had lost her husband’s love, the love which for a
brief space had made the whole world seem a wonderful
place. Looking ahead, as far as she was able to look
ahead, she could see nothing to hope for. She was tormented
by the hideous knowledge of what lay in the
barren flower-bed in the backyard; the whole future held
out no promise for her. She would have faced the peril
that hung over her husband—and over herself as well,
she realized—gladly, had she only been sure that her
husband wished her to do so. But instead she was only
sure of the opposite. He would be glad to have her out
of the way, and she——? She would be glad to be out of
the way.</p>

<p>That set her thoughts moving swiftly on another tack.
It might be easy enough. But if only she had died during
this illness! She tried to piece together in her mind what
that book of Will’s had said about the stuff—that—that—the
stuff that still stood on the locked shelves in the
bathroom. Death is practically instantaneous. Death is
practically instantaneous.</p>

<p>That meant an easy death, a quick death. There would
be no trouble about it, none at all. Oh, it would be the
best way. That clearness of thought was in evidence at
present. Will was downstairs, and he was unlikely to disturb
her for some time. It could be done, and better do
it now, and save trouble, save trouble.</p>

<p>Annie threw off the bedclothes and set her feet to the
floor. Even as she did so she found how unsteady she
was. The room seemed to swing round her in a great arc;
she nearly fell to the floor, and she would have done had
she not, by a vast effort, seized the bed and collapsed
across it. It took several minutes for her to recover. She
tried again, more tentatively, and again she had hard
work to save herself from falling. She could not walk, that
was certain. But that would not prevent her.</p>

<p>Slowly, with infinite precaution, she lowered herself to
the floor. Then she crawled across the floor towards the
window. It was dreadfully hard work; she could only
move slowly. The cold air and the coldness of the
linoleum bit deep into her, and she shuddered as she
moved.</p>

<p>She reached the chest of drawers, and clutching the
knobs she pulled herself to her feet, standing there swaying.
It took several seconds for her to grow used to this
position. Once she swayed dangerously, but her grip on
the drawer-knobs saved her. Then she pulled open one
of the drawers and did what she had been wanting to
do all through her illness. She pulled out the strange
letter, and read it through, as closely as her swimming
eyes would allow. She was right. There was no hope for
her in it. It began ‘My dearest, darling Will’ sure enough.
Once again the satire was lost on her. She reeled as she
stood. Then she thrust the letter back into the drawer
and closed it.</p>

<p>Somehow she was still able to think clearly. The next
thing she wanted was the key. All Will’s keys were on a
ring on the dressing-table. She had to crawl there to get
them. Then she crawled—oh, so slowly—out through the
door to the bathroom. The effort of standing up again
when she reached the shelves was almost too much for
her, but she achieved it. She stood listening for a brief
space, just to make sure that Will was still busy downstairs.
It would never do for him to come up now and
find her there. But it was all quiet. She could just hear
him, pottering about in the kitchen. The key fitted
easily, and she opened the glass door. There on the shelf,
just as she had seen it so long ago, stood the bottle—potassium
cyanide. She took it in her hand, fondled it,
she almost smiled as she looked at it.</p>

<p>On the edge of the bath stood one of her medicine
glasses. She filled it half full, the neck of the bottle chattering
on the rim of the glass, and replaced the bottle.
As it stood there on the shelf she tried to bow to it; she
tried to say ‘thank you’ to it. And she locked the shelf
door again tidily.</p>

<p>She stood hesitating for a space, holding on to the edge
of the bath. She did not want to die here, in this cold
place. She would much rather die in her splendid great
bed with the cupids twined about it. It would be risky
trying to get back, but she thought she would run the
risk. Oh, but it was so hard. She crawled along the floor,
pushing the medicine glass in front of her, the keys trailing
by their ring from one finger. Very hard it was, but
she succeeded in the end. She hardly spilt a drop on the
way.</p>

<p>The medicine glass stood on the floor beside the bed.
It was as much as she could manage to pull herself half
erect and fall across the bed. She had to lie and rest
again, after that. But now at last she was ready. She must
make everything neat and tidy first. With fumbling
fingers she drew the bedclothes round her, and set her
boudoir cap straight and settled the lace at her throat.
Then she leaned over the side of the bed and took the
glass in her hand. There was no hesitation in her raising
it to her lips. She drained it, and the glass fell from her
fingers to the floor and rolled under the bed.</p>

<p>But even now things went hardly for her. That cyanide
had been kept in solution for over a year, slowly reacting
with itself and with the atmosphere. It was not an easy
death, not a quick death.</p>

<div><h1 class='nobreak'><span class='it'>CHAPTER XVI</span></h1></div>

<p>Mr Marble had just finished his preliminary morning’s
work when Dr Atkinson’s rat-tat-tat came at the door.</p>

<p>‘How is she this morning?’ asked Atkinson as they
went up the stairs together.</p>

<p>‘She seemed a little bit down when I was with her
last. But I haven’t been up to her for some time,’ said
Marble.</p>

<p>They entered the room, where Annie lay in the big
gilt bed, with the other gilt furniture blazing about her.
She lay there in a natural attitude, and there was a trace
of colour in her cheeks. But there was something different,
which flashed to Atkinson’s trained eye the moment
it rested on her.</p>

<p>‘She’s dead!’ said Atkinson, moving forward.</p>

<p>Marble was there before him, standing by the bed with
his hands clasped in front of him. It is impossible to say
whether he was moved or not; all that he was conscious
of at the moment was that his heart was thumping and
thudding within him the way it always did nowadays
when anything unusual happened. It beat and it beat,
and his hands shook with the vibrations.</p>

<p>‘Her heart, I suppose,’ said Atkinson, coming to the
bedside.</p>

<p>He might have spared Marble the technical details if
only Marble had appeared upset. But Marble did not.
He was too busy thinking—his mind had started racing
away as it always did, to the accompaniment of the thudding
of his heart. He was working out all the details of
how this change would affect him; what difference it
would make to his chances of continuing to avoid detection.
All he could do was to stare at the body while his
hands shook and his face remained stolid. Clearly his
thoughts were far away.</p>

<p>With an effort he recalled himself. Suspicion, suspicion!
He must do all he could to avoid suspicion. He looked
sidelong at Atkinson, and caught Atkinson looking sidelong
at him. He started, and tried to appear concerned.</p>

<p>Now up to that moment Atkinson had not had the
least trace of suspicion, but that glance and that start
set thoughts flooding into his mind. He bent over the
body, and noticed something else, something which
roused him to the highest pitch of suspicion.</p>

<p>‘I must make a slight examination,’ he said, ‘could you
go downstairs and get me—get me a spoon? A silver
spoon.’</p>

<p>Marble went without a word, like an ox to the
slaughter. No sooner had he left the room than Atkinson
sprang into activity. He tiptoed across to see that Marble
was really gone, and then he hurried back. There was
a trace of foam on the dead woman’s lips. There was a
trace of a faint odour. He glanced under the bed; a medicine
glass lay there. He picked it up and looked at it.
A little of the contents remained. Close examination of
this made him certain. When Marble came back to the
room he was scribbling something on a sheet from his
pocket-book.</p>

<p>‘I shall want this as well,’ he said. ‘Will you go and
give this note to the boy in my car outside, and ask him
to go straight home for it?’</p>

<p>Marble took it. The note was an order to the boy to
fetch a policeman, but Marble did not know that.</p>

<p>So they hanged William Marble for the murder of his
wife. It was a simple case. They proved that she had died
of cyanide poisoning, and they proved that Marble had
cyanide in his possession. Dr Atkinson swore that Annie
Marble would be quite incapable of going into the bathroom
to get it for herself. Everything else pointed towards
the same end. He would not have a nurse for her, but
had insisted on doing everything himself, against the
urgent advice of his doctor. Neighbours came flocking in,
eager to swear that there had been bad blood between
Marble and his wife for a long time, and that they had
often heard quarrels and cries. They even found downstairs
a number of books on crime, and in one book on
medical jurisprudence the page where cyanide poisoning
was discussed was much thumbed and dirty, through
constant study. And for a motive—well, they found in a
drawer a letter from a woman that amply proved a
motive. It was a letter that Marble knew nothing about,
but no one believed him when he said so. In fact, Marble
went down through history as an extraordinarily clumsy
murderer.</p>

<p>And Winnie inherited twelve hundred a year.</p>
